OF THE STREET-FINDERS OR COLLECTORS.


These men, for by far the great majority are men, may be divided,
according to the nature of their occupations, into three classes:--

1. The bone-grubbers and rag-gatherers, who are, indeed, the same
individuals, the pure-finders, and the cigar-end and old wood
collectors.

2. The dredgermen, the mud-larks, and the sewer-hunters.

3. The dustmen and nightmen, the sweeps and the scavengers.

The first class go abroad daily to _find_ in the streets, and carry
away with them such things as bones, rags, “pure” (or dogs’-dung),
which no one appropriates. These they sell, and on that sale support
a wretched life. The second class of people are also as strictly
_finders_; but their industry, or rather their labour, is confined to
the river, or to that subterranean city of sewerage unto which the
Thames supplies the great outlets. These persons may not be immediately
connected with the _streets_ of London, but their pursuits are carried
on in the open air (if the sewer-air may be so included), and are all,
at any rate, out-of-door avocations. The third class is distinct from
either of these, as the labourers comprised in it are not finders, but
_collectors_ or _removers_ of the dirt and filth of our streets and
houses, and of the soot of our chimneys.

The two first classes also differ from the third in the fact that the
sweeps, dustmen, scavengers, &c., are paid (and often large sums) for
the removal of the refuse they collect; whereas the bone-grubbers, and
mud-larks, and pure-finders, and dredgermen, and sewer-hunters, get for
their pains only the value of the articles they gather.

Herein, too, lies a broad distinction between the street-finder, or
collector, and the street-buyer: though both deal principally with
refuse, the buyer _pays_ for what he is permitted to take away; whereas
the finder or collector is either paid (like the sweep), or else he
neither pays nor is paid (like the bone-grubber), for the refuse that
he removes.

The third class of street-collectors also presents another and a
markedly distinctive characteristic. They act in the capacity of
servants, and do not depend upon chance for the result of their day’s
labour, but are put to stated tasks, being employed and paid a fixed
sum for their work. To this description, however, some of the sweeps
present an exception; as when the sweep works on his own account, or,
as it is worded, “is his own master.”

The public health requires the periodical cleaning of the streets, and
the removal of the refuse matter from our dwellings; and the man who
contracts to carry on this work is decidedly a street-collector; for
on what he collects or removes depends the amount of his remuneration.
Thus a wealthy contractor for the public scavengery, is as entirely one
of the street-folk as the unskilled and ignorant labourer he employs.
The master lives, and, in many instances, has become rich, on the
results of his street employment; for, of course, the actual workmen
are but as the agents or sources of his profit. Even the collection of
“pure” (dogs’-dung) in the streets, if conducted by the servants of any
tanner or leather dresser, either for the purposes of his own trade or
for sale to others, might be the occupation of a wealthy man, deriving
a small profit from the labour of each particular collector. The same
may also be said of bone-grubbing, or any similar occupation, however
insignificant, and now abandoned to the outcast.

Were the collection of mud and dust carried on by a number of distinct
individuals--that is to say, were each individual dustman and scavenger
to collect on his own account, there is no doubt that no _one man_
could amass a fortune by such means--while if the collection of bones
and rags and even dogs’-dung were carried on “in the large way,” that
is to say, by a number of individual collectors working for one “head
man,” even the picking up of the most abject refuse of the metropolis
might become the source of great riches.

The bone-grubber and the mud-lark (the searcher for refuse on the
banks of the river) differ little in their pursuits or in their
characteristics, excepting that the mud-larks are generally boys, which
is more an accidental than a definite distinction. The grubbers are
with a few exceptions stupid, unconscious of their degradation, and
with little anxiety to be relieved from it. They are usually taciturn,
but this taciturn habit is common to men whose callings, if they
cannot be called solitary, are pursued with little communication with
others. I was informed by a man who once kept a little beer-shop near
Friar-street, Southwark Bridge-road (where then and still, he thought,
was a bone-grinding establishment), that the bone-grubbers who carried
their sacks of bones thither sometimes had a pint of beer at his house
when they had received their money. They usually sat, he told me,
silently looking at the corners of the floor--for they rarely lifted
their eyes up--as if they were expecting to see some bones or refuse
there available for their bags. Of this inertion, perhaps fatigue and
despair may be a part. I asked some questions of a man of this class
whom I saw pick up in a road in the suburbs something that appeared to
have been a coarse canvas apron, although it was wet after a night’s
rain and half covered with mud. I inquired of him what he thought
about when he trudged along looking on the ground on every side. His
answer was, “Of nothing, sir.” I believe that no better description
could be given of that vacuity of mind or mental inactivity which
seems to form a part of the most degraded callings. The minds of such
men, even without an approach to idiotcy, appear to be a blank. One
characteristic of these poor fellows, bone-grubbers and mud-larks, is
that they are very poor, although I am told some of them, the older
men, have among the poor the reputation of being misers. It is not
unusual for the youths belonging to these callings to live with their
parents and give them the amount of their earnings.

The sewer-hunters are again distinct, and a far more intelligent and
adventurous class; but they work in gangs. They must be familiar with
the course of the tides, or they might be drowned at high water. They
must have quick eyes too, not merely to descry the objects of their
search, but to mark the points and bearings of the subterraneous
roads they traverse; in a word, “to know their way underground.”
There is, moreover, some spirit of daring in venturing into a dark,
solitary sewer, the chart being only in the memory, and in braving
the possibility of noxious vapours, and the by no means insignificant
dangers of the rats infesting these places.

The dredgermen, the finders of the water, are again distinct, as being
watermen, and working in boats. In some foreign parts, in Naples, for
instance, men carrying on similar pursuits are also divers for anything
lost in the bay or its confluent waters. One of these men, known some
years ago as “the Fish,” could remain (at least, so say those whom
there is no reason to doubt) three hours under the water without
rising to the surface to take breath. He was, it is said, web-footed,
naturally, and partially web-fingered. The King of the Two Sicilies
once threw a silver cup into the sea for “the Fish” to bring up and
retain as a reward, but the poor diver was never seen again. It was
believed that he got entangled among the weeds on the rocks, and so
perished. The dredgermen are necessarily well acquainted with the sets
of the tide and the course of the currents in the Thames. Every one of
these men works on his own account, being as it were a “small master,”
which, indeed, is one of the great attractions of open-air pursuits.
The dredgermen also depend for their maintenance upon the sale of what
they find, or the rewards they receive.

It is otherwise, however, as was before observed, with the third class
of the street-finders, or rather collectors. In all the capacities of
dustmen, nightmen, scavengers, and sweeps, the employers of the men are
_paid_ to do the work, the proceeds of the street-collection forming
only a portion of the employer’s remuneration. The sweep has the soot
in addition to his 6_d._ or 1_s._; the master scavenger has a payment
from the parish funds to sweep the streets, though the clearance of
the cesspools, &c., in private houses, may be an individual bargain.
The whole refuse of the streets belongs to the contractor to make the
best of, but it must be cleared away, and so must the contents of a
dust-bin; for if a mass of dirt become offensive, the householder may
be indicted for a nuisance, and municipal by-laws require its removal.
It is thus made a matter of compulsion that the dust be removed from
a private house; but it is otherwise with the soot. Why a man should
be permitted to let soot accumulate in his chimney--perhaps exposing
himself, his family, his lodgers, and his neighbours to the dangers of
fire, it may not be easy to account for, especially when we bear in
mind that the same man may not accumulate cabbage-leaves and fish-tails
in his yard.

The dustmen are of the plodding class of labourers, mere labourers, who
require only bodily power, and possess little or no mental development.
Many of the agricultural labourers are of this order, and the dustman
often seems to be the stolid ploughman, modified by a residence in a
city, and engaged in a peculiar calling. They are generally uninformed,
and no few of them are dustmen because their fathers were. The same
may be said of nightmen and scavengers. At one time it was a popular,
or rather a vulgar notion that many dustmen had become possessed of
large sums, from the plate, coins, and valuables they found in clearing
the dust-bins--a manifest absurdity; but I was told by a marine-store
dealer that he had known a young woman, a dustman’s daughter, sell
silver spoons to a neighbouring marine-store man, who was “not very
particular.”

The circumstances and character of the chimney-sweeps have, since
Parliament “put down” the climbing boys, undergone considerable change.
The sufferings of many of the climbing boys were very great. They
were often ill-lodged, ill-fed, barely-clad, forced to ascend hot and
narrow flues, and subject to diseases--such as the chimney-sweep’s
cancer--peculiar to their calling. The child hated his trade, and was
easily tempted to be a thief, for prison was an asylum; or he grew
up a morose tyrannical fellow as journeyman or master. Some of the
young sweeps became very bold thieves and house-breakers, and the most
remarkable, as far as personal daring is concerned: the boldest feat of
escape from Newgate was performed by a youth who had been brought up
a chimney-sweep. He climbed up the two bare rugged walls of a corner
of the interior of the prison, in the open air, to the height of some
60 feet. He had only the use of his hands, knees, and feet, and a
single slip, from fear or pain, would have been death; he surmounted a
parapet after this climbing, and gained the roof, but was recaptured
before he could get clear away. He was, moreover, a sickly, and reputed
a cowardly, young man, and ended his career in this country by being
transported.

A master sweep, now in middle age, and a man “well to do,” told me that
when a mere child he had been apprenticed out of the workhouse to a
sweep, such being at that time a common occurrence. He had undergone,
he said, great hardships while learning his business, and was long,
from the indifferent character of his class, ashamed of being a sweep,
both as journeyman and master; but the sweeps were so much improved in
character now, that he no longer felt himself disgraced in his calling.

The sweeps are more intelligent than the mere ordinary labourers I have
written of under this head, but they are, of course, far from being an
educated body.

The further and more minute characteristics of the curious class of
street-finders or collectors will be found in the particular details
and statements.

Among the finders there is perhaps the greatest poverty existing,
they being the very lowest class of all the street-people. Many of
the very old live on the hard dirty crusts they pick up out of the
roads in the course of their rounds, washing them and steeping them
in water before they eat them. Probably that vacuity of mind which is
a distinguishing feature of the class is the mere atony or emaciation
of the mental faculties proceeding from--though often producing in the
want of energy that it necessarily begets--the extreme wretchedness
of the class. But even their liberty and a crust--as it frequently
literally is--appears preferable to these people to the restrictions of
the workhouse. Those who are unable to comprehend the inertia of both
body and mind begotten by the despair of long-continued misfortune are
referred to page 357 of the first volume of this work, where it will
be found that a tinman, in speaking of the misery connected with the
early part of his street-career, describes the effect of extreme want
as producing not only an absence of all hope, but even of a desire to
better the condition. Those, however, who have studied the mysterious
connection between body and mind, and observed what different creatures
they themselves are before and after dinner, can well understand that a
long-continued deficiency of food must have the same weakening effect
on the muscles of the mind and energy of the thoughts and will, as it
has on the limbs themselves.

Occasionally it will be found that the utter abjectness of the
bone-grubbers has arisen from the want of energy begotten by
intemperate habits. The workman has nothing but this same energy
to live upon, and the permanent effect of stimulating liquors is
to produce an amount of depression corresponding to the excitement
momentarily caused by them in the frame. The operative, therefore,
who spends his earnings on “drink,” not only squanders them on a
brutalising luxury, but deprives himself of the power, and consequently
of the disposition, to work for more, and hence that idleness,
carelessness, and neglect which are the distinctive qualities of the
drunkard, and sooner or later compass his ruin.

For the poor wretched children who are reared to this the lowest trade
of all, surely even the most insensible and unimaginative must feel
the acutest pity. There is, however, this consolation: I have heard
of none, with the exception of the more prosperous sewer-hunters and
dredgermen, who have remained all their lives at street-finding. Still
there remains much to be done by all those who are impressed with a
sense of the trust that has been confided to them, in the possession of
those endowments which render their lot in this world so much more easy
than that of the less lucky street-finders.


BONE-GRUBBERS AND RAG-GATHERERS.

The habits of the bone-grubbers and rag-gatherers, the “pure,” or
dogs’-dung collectors, and the cigar-end finders, are necessarily
similar. All lead a wandering, unsettled sort of life, being compelled
to be continually on foot, and to travel many miles every day in search
of the articles in which they deal. They seldom have any fixed place of
abode, and are mostly to be found at night in one or other of the low
lodging-houses throughout London. The majority are, moreover, persons
who have been brought up to other employments, but who from some
failing or mishap have been reduced to such a state of distress that
they were obliged to take to their present occupation, and have never
after been able to get away from it.

Of the whole class it is considered that there are from 800 to 1000
resident in London, one-half of whom, at the least, sleep in the
cheap lodging-houses. The Government returns estimate the number of
mendicants’ lodging-houses in London to be upwards of 200. Allowing
two bone-grubbers and pure-finders to frequent each of these
lodging-houses, there will be upwards of 400 availing themselves of
such nightly shelters. As many more, I am told, live in garrets and
ill-furnished rooms in the lowest neighbourhoods. There is no instance
on record of any of the class renting even the smallest house for
himself.

Moreover there are in London during the winter a number of persons
called “trampers,” who employ themselves at that season in
street-finding. These people are in the summer country labourers
of some sort, but as soon as the harvest and potato-getting and
hop-picking are over, and they can find nothing else to do in the
country, they come back to London to avail themselves of the shelter
of the night asylums or refuges for the destitute (usually called
“straw-yards” by the poor), for if they remained in the provinces at
that period of the year they would be forced to have recourse to the
unions, and as they can only stay one night in each place they would
be obliged to travel from ten to fifteen miles per day, to which in
the winter they have a strong objection. They come up to London in the
winter, not to look for any regular work or employment, but because
they know that they can have a nightly shelter, and bread night and
morning for nothing, during that season, and can during the day collect
bones, rags, &c. As soon as the “straw-yards” close, which is generally
about the beginning of April, the “trampers” again start off to the
country in small bands of two or three, and without any fixed residence
keep wandering about all the summer, sometimes begging their way
through the villages and sleeping in the casual wards of the unions,
and sometimes, when hard driven, working at hay-making or any other
light labour.

[Illustration: THE BONE-GRUBBER.

[_From a Daguerreotype by_ BEARD.]]

Those among the bone-grubbers who do not belong to the regular
“trampers” have been either navvies, or men who have not been able
to obtain employment at their own business, and have been driven to
it by necessity as a means of obtaining a little bread for the time
being, and without any intention of pursuing the calling regularly;
but, as I have said, when once in the business they cannot leave it,
for at least they make certain of getting a few halfpence by it, and
their present necessity does not allow them time to look after other
employment. There are many of the street-finders who are old men and
women, and many very young children who have no other means of living.
Since the famine in Ireland vast numbers of that unfortunate people,
particularly boys and girls, have been engaged in gathering bones and
rags in the streets.

The bone-picker and rag-gatherer may be known at once by the greasy
bag which he carries on his back. Usually he has a stick in his hand,
and this is armed with a spike or hook, for the purpose of more easily
turning over the heaps of ashes or dirt that are thrown out of the
houses, and discovering whether they contain anything that is saleable
at the rag-and-bottle or marine-store shop. The bone-grubber generally
seeks out the narrow back streets, where dust and refuse are cast, or
where any dust-bins are accessible. The articles for which he chiefly
searches are rags and bones--rags he prefers--but waste metal, such as
bits of lead, pewter, copper, brass, or old iron, he prizes above all.
Whatever he meets with that he knows to be in any way saleable he puts
into the bag at his back. He often finds large lumps of bread which
have been thrown out as waste by the servants, and occasionally the
housekeepers will give him some bones on which there is a little meat
remaining; these constitute the morning meal of most of the class. One
of my informants had a large rump of beef bone given to him a few days
previous to my seeing him, on which “there was not less than a pound of
meat.”

The bone-pickers and rag-gatherers are all early risers. They have
all their separate beats or districts, and it is most important to
them that they should reach their district before any one else of
the same class can go over the ground. Some of the beats lie as far
as Peckham, Clapham, Hammersmith, Hampstead, Bow, Stratford, and
indeed all parts within about five miles of London. In summer time
they rise at two in the morning, and sometimes earlier. It is not
quite light at this hour--but bones and rags can be discovered before
daybreak. The “grubbers” scour all quarters of London, but abound more
particularly in the suburbs. In the neighbourhood of Petticoat-lane
and Ragfair, however, they are the most numerous on account of the
greater quantity of rags which the Jews have to throw out. It usually
takes the bone-picker from seven to nine hours to go over his rounds,
during which time he travels from 20 to 30 miles with a quarter to a
half hundredweight on his back. In the summer he usually reaches home
about eleven of the day, and in the winter about one or two. On his
return home he proceeds to sort the contents of his bag. He separates
the rags from the bones, and these again from the old metal (if he
be lucky enough to have found any). He divides the rags into various
lots, according as they are white or coloured; and if he have picked up
any pieces of canvas or sacking, he makes these also into a separate
parcel. When he has finished the sorting he takes his several lots
to the rag-shop or the marine-store dealer, and realizes upon them
whatever they may be worth. For the white rags he gets from 2_d._ to
3_d._ per pound, according as they are clean or soiled. The white rags
are very difficult to be found; they are mostly very dirty, and are
therefore sold with the coloured ones at the rate of about 5 lbs. for
2_d._ The bones are usually sold with the coloured rags at one and
the same price. For fragments of canvas or sacking the grubber gets
about three-farthings a pound; and old brass, copper, and pewter about
4_d._ (the marine-store keepers say 5_d._), and old iron one farthing
per pound, or six pounds for 1_d._ The bone-grubber thinks he has
done an excellent day’s work if he can earn 8_d._; and some of them,
especially the very old and the very young, do not earn more than
from 2_d._ to 3_d._ a day. To make 10_d._ a day, at the present price
of rags and bones, a man must be remarkably active and strong,--“ay!
and lucky, too,” adds my informant. The average amount of earnings, I
am told, varies from about 6_d._ to 8_d._ per day, or from 3_s._ to
4_s._ a week; and the highest amount that a man, the most brisk and
persevering at the business, can by any possibility earn in one week is
about 5_s._, but this can only be accomplished by great good fortune
and industry--the usual weekly gains are about half that sum. In bad
weather the bone-grubber cannot do so well, because the rags are wet,
and then they cannot sell them. The majority pick up bones only in wet
weather; those who _do_ gather rags during or after rain are obliged to
wash and dry them before they can sell them. The state of the shoes of
the rag and bone-picker is a very important matter to him; for if he
be well shod he can get quickly over the ground; but he is frequently
lamed, and unable to make any progress from the blisters and gashes on
his feet, occasioned by the want of proper shoes.

Sometimes the bone-grubbers will pick up a stray sixpence or a shilling
that has been dropped in the street. “The handkerchief I have round
my neck,” said one whom I saw, “I picked up with 1_s._ in the corner.
The greatest prize I ever found was the brass cap of the nave of a
coach-wheel; and I _did_ once find a quarter of a pound of tobacco in
Sun-street, Bishopsgate. The best bit of luck of all that I ever had
was finding a cheque for 12_l._ 15_s._ lying in the gateway of the
mourning-coach yard in Titchborne-street, Haymarket. I was going to
light my pipe with it, indeed I picked it up for that purpose, and
then saw it was a cheque. It was on the London and County Bank, 21,
Lombard-street. I took it there, and got 10_s._ for finding it. I went
there in my rags, as I am now, and the cashier stared a bit at me. The
cheque was drawn by a Mr. Knibb, and payable to a Mr. Cox. I _did_
think I should have got the odd 15_s._ though.”

It has been stated that the average amount of the earnings of the
bone-pickers is 6_d._ per day, or 3_s._ per week, being 7_l._ 16_s._
per annum for each person. It has also been shown that the number of
persons engaged in the business may be estimated at about 800; hence
the earnings of the entire number will amount to the sum of 20_l._ per
day, or 120_l._ per week, which gives 6240_l._ as the annual earnings
of the bone-pickers and rag-gatherers of London. It may also be
computed that each of the grubbers gathers on an average 20 lbs. weight
of bone and rags; and reckoning the bones to constitute three-fourths
of the entire weight, we thus find that the gross quantity of these
articles gathered by the street-finders in the course of the year,
amounts to 3,744,000 lbs. of bones, and 1,240,000 lbs. of rags.

Between the London and St. Katherine’s Docks and Rosemary Lane, there
is a large district inter-laced with narrow lanes, courts, and alleys
ramifying into each other in the most intricate and disorderly manner,
insomuch that it would be no easy matter for a stranger to work his
way through the interminable confusion without the aid of a guide,
resident in and well conversant with the locality. The houses are of
the poorest description, and seem as if they tumbled into their places
at random. Foul channels, huge dust-heaps, and a variety of other
unsightly objects, occupy every open space, and dabbling among these
are crowds of ragged dirty children who grub and wallow, as if in their
native element. None reside in these places but the poorest and most
wretched of the population, and, as might almost be expected, this,
the cheapest and filthiest locality of London, is the head-quarters of
the bone-grubbers and other street-finders. I have ascertained on the
best authority, that from the centre of this place, within a circle
of a mile in diameter, there dwell not less than 200 persons of this
class. In this quarter I found a bone-grubber who gave me the following
account of himself:--

“I was born in Liverpool, and when about 14 years of age, my father
died. He used to work about the Docks, and I used to run on errands for
any person who wanted me. I managed to live by this after my father’s
death for three or four years. I had a brother older than myself, who
went to France to work on the railroads, and when I was about 18 he
sent for me, and got me to work with himself on the Paris and Rouen
Railway, under McKenzie and Brassy, who had the contract. I worked on
the railroads in France for four years, till the disturbance broke
out, and then we all got notice to leave the country. I lodged at that
time with a countryman, and had 12_l._, which I had saved out of my
earnings. This sum I gave to my countryman to keep for me till we got
to London, as I did not like to have it about me, for fear I’d lose it.
The French people paid our fare from Rouen to Havre by the railway,
and there put us on board a steamer to Southampton. There was about 50
of us altogether. When we got to Southampton, we all went before the
mayor; we told him about how we had been driven out of France, and he
gave us a shilling a piece; he sent some one with us, too, to get us
a lodging, and told us to come again the next day. In the morning the
mayor gave every one who was able to walk half-a-crown, and for those
who were not able he paid their fare to London on the railroad. I had
a sore leg at the time, and I came up by the train, and when I gave
up my ticket at the station, the gentleman gave me a shilling more. I
couldn’t find the man I had given my money to, because he had walked
up; and I went before the Lord Mayor to ask his advice; he gave me
2_s._ 6_d._ I looked for work everywhere, but could get nothing to do;
and when the 2_s._ 6_d._ was all spent, I heard that the man who had
my money was on the London and York Railway in the country; however, I
couldn’t get that far for want of money then; so I went again before
the Lord Mayor, and he gave me two more, but told me not to trouble him
any further. I told the Lord Mayor about the money, and then he sent an
officer with me, who put me into a carriage on the railway. When I got
down to where the man was at work, he wouldn’t give me a farthing; I
had given him the money without any witness bring present, and he said
I could do nothing, because it was done in another country. I staid
down there more than a week trying to get work on the railroad, but
could not. I had no money and was nearly starved, when two or three
took pity on me, and made up four or five shillings for me, to take
me back again to London. I tried all I could to get something to do,
till the money was nearly gone; and then I took to selling lucifers,
and the fly-papers that they use in the shops, and little things like
that; but I could do no good at this work, there was too many at it
before me, and they knew more about it than I did. At last, I got so
bad off I didn’t know what to do; but seeing a great many about here
gathering bones and rags, I thought I’d do so too--a poor fellow must
do something. I was advised to do so, and I have been at it ever since.
I forgot to tell you that my brother died in France. We had good wages
there, four francs a day, or 3_s._ 4_d._ English; I don’t make more
than 3_d._ or 4_d._ and sometimes 6_d._ a day at bone-picking. I don’t
go out before daylight to gather anything, because the police takes
my bag and throws all I’ve gathered about the street to see if I have
anything stolen in it. I never stole anything in all my life, indeed
I’d do anything before I’d steal. Many a night I’ve slept under an arch
of the railway when I hadn’t a penny to pay for my bed; but whenever
the police find me that way, they make me and the rest get up, and
drive us on, and tell us to keep moving. I don’t go out on wet days,
there’s no use in it, as the things won’t be bought. I can’t wash and
dry them, because I’m in a lodging-house. There’s a great deal more
than a 100 bone-pickers about here, men, women, and children. The Jews
in this lane and up in Petticoat-lane give a good deal of victuals
away on the Saturday. They sometimes call one of us in from the street
to light the fire for them, or take off the kettle, as they must not
do anything themselves on the Sabbath; and then they put some food on
the footpath, and throw rags and bones into the street for us, because
they must not hand anything to us. There are some about here who get a
couple of shillings’ worth of goods, and go on board the ships in the
Docks, and exchange them for bones and bits of old canvas among the
sailors; I’d buy and do so too if I only had the money, but can’t get
it. The summer is the worst time for us, the winter is much better,
for there is more meat used in winter, and then there are more bones.”
(Others say differently.) “I intend to go to the country this season,
and try to get something to do at the hay-making and harvest. I make
about 2_s._ 6_d._ a week, and the way I manage is this: sometimes I
get a piece of bread about 12 o’clock, and I make my breakfast of
that and cold water; very seldom I have any dinner,--unless I earn
6_d._ I can’t get any,--and then I have a basin of nice soup, or a
penn’orth of plum-pudding and a couple of baked ’tatoes. At night I
get 1/4_d._ worth of coffee, 1/2_d._ worth of sugar, and 1-1/4_d._
worth of bread, and then I have 2_d._ a night left for my lodging; I
always try to manage that, for I’d do anything sooner than stop out all
night. I’m always happy the day when I make 4_d._, for then I know I
won’t have to sleep in the street. The winter before last, there was a
straw-yard down in Black Jack’s-alley, where we used to go after six
o’clock in the evening, and get 1/2 lb. of bread, and another 1/2 lb.
in the morning, and then we’d gather what we could in the daytime and
buy victuals with what we got for it. We were well off then, but the
straw-yard wasn’t open at all last winter. There used to be 300 of
us in there of a night, a great many of the dock-labourers and their
families were there, for no work was to be got in the docks; so they
weren’t able to pay rent, and were obliged to go in. I’ve lost my
health since I took to bone-picking, through the wet and cold in the
winter, for I’ve scarcely any clothes, and the wet gets to my feet
through the old shoes; this caused me last winter to be nine weeks in
the hospital of the Whitechapel workhouse.”

The narrator of this tale seemed so dejected and broken in spirit,
that it was with difficulty his story was elicited from him. He was
evidently labouring under incipient consumption. I have every reason
to believe that he made a truthful statement,--indeed, he did not
appear to me to have sufficient intellect to invent a falsehood. It is
a curious fact, indeed, with reference to the London street-finders
generally, that they seem to possess less rational power than any
other class. They appear utterly incapable of trading even in the most
trifling commodities, probably from the fact that buying articles
for the purpose of selling them at a profit, requires an exercise
of the mind to which they feel themselves incapable. Begging, too,
requires some ingenuity or tact, in order to move the sympathies of
the well-to-do, and the street-finders being incompetent for this,
they work on day after day as long as they are able to crawl about in
pursuit of their unprofitable calling. This cannot be fairly said of
the younger members of this class, who are sent into the streets by
their parents, and many of whom are afterwards able to find some more
reputable and more lucrative employment. As a body of people, however,
young and old, they mostly exhibit the same stupid, half-witted
appearance.

To show how bone-grubbers occasionally manage to obtain shelter
during the night, the following incident may not be out of place. A
few mornings past I accidentally encountered one of this class in a
narrow back lane; his ragged coat--the colour of the rubbish among
which he toiled--was greased over, probably with the fat of the bones
he gathered, and being mixed with the dust it seemed as if the man
were covered with bird-lime. His shoes--torn and tied on his feet with
pieces of cord--had doubtlessly been picked out of some dust-bin, while
his greasy bag and stick unmistakably announced his calling. Desirous
of obtaining all the information possible on this subject, I asked him
a few questions, took his address, which he gave without hesitation,
and bade him call on me in the evening. At the time appointed, however,
he did not appear; on the following day therefore I made way to the
address he had given, and on reaching the spot I was astonished to find
the house in which he had said he lived was uninhabited. A padlock was
on the door, the boards of which were parting with age. There was not
a whole pane of glass in any of the windows, and the frames of many of
them were shattered or demolished. Some persons in the neighbourhood,
noticing me eyeing the place, asked whom I wanted. On my telling the
man’s name, which it appeared he had not dreamt of disguising, I
was informed that he had left the day before, saying he had met the
landlord in the morning (for such it turned out he had fancied me to
be), and that the gentleman had wanted him to come to his house, but
he was afraid to go lest he should be sent to prison for breaking into
the place. I found, on inspection, that the premises, though locked
up, could be entered by the rear, one of the window-frames having been
removed, so that admission could be obtained through the aperture.
Availing myself of the same mode of ingress, I proceeded to examine
the premises. Nothing could well be more dismal or dreary than the
interior. The floors were rotting with damp and mildew, especially
near the windows, where the wet found easy entrance. The walls were
even slimy and discoloured, and everything bore the appearance of
desolation. In one corner was strewn a bundle of dirty straw, which
doubtlessly had served the bone-grubber for a bed, while scattered
about the floor were pieces of bones, and small fragments of dirty
rags, sufficient to indicate the calling of the late inmate. He had
had but little difficulty in removing his property, seeing that it
consisted solely of his bag and his stick.

The following paragraph concerning the chiffoniers or rag-gatherers of
Paris appeared in the London journals a few weeks since:--

“The fraternal association of rag-gatherers (chiffoniers) gave a
grand banquet on Saturday last (21st of June). It took place at
a public-house called the _Pot Tricolore_, near the _Barrière de
Fontainbleau_, which is frequented by the rag-gathering fraternity. In
this house there are three rooms, each of which is specially devoted
to the use of different classes of rag-gatherers: one, the least
dirty, is called the ‘Chamber of Peers,’ and is occupied by the first
class--that is, those who possess a basket in a good state, and a crook
ornamented with copper; the second, called the ‘Chamber of Deputies,’
belonging to the second class, is much less comfortable, and those
who attend it have baskets and crooks not of first-rate quality; the
third room is in a dilapidated condition, and is frequented by the
lowest class of rag-gatherers who have no basket or crook, and who
place what they find in the streets in a piece of sackcloth. They call
themselves the ‘_Réunion des Vrais Prolétaires_.’ The name of each room
is written in chalk above the door; and generally such strict etiquette
is observed among the rag-gatherers that no one goes into the apartment
not occupied by his own class. At Saturday’s banquet, however, all
distinctions of rank were laid aside, and delegates of each class
united fraternally. The president was the oldest rag-gatherer in Paris;
his age is 88, and he is called ‘the Emperor.’ The banquet consisted
of a sort of _olla podrida_, which the master of the establishment
pompously called _gibelotte_, though of what animal it was composed it
was impossible to say. It was served up in huge earthen dishes, and
before it was allowed to be touched payment was demanded and obtained;
the other articles were also paid for as soon as they were brought in;
and a deposit was exacted as a security for the plates, knives, and
forks. The wine, or what did duty as such, was contained in an earthen
pot called the _Petit Père Noir_, and was filled from a gigantic vessel
named _Le Moricaud_. The dinner was concluded by each guest taking a
small glass of brandy. Business was then proceeded to. It consisted
in the reading and adoption of the statutes of the association,
followed by the drinking of numerous toasts to the president, to the
prosperity of rag-gathering, to the union of rag-gatherers, &c. A
collection amounting to 6_f._ 75_c._ was raised for sick members of the
fraternity. The guests then dispersed; but several of them remained at
the counter until they had consumed in brandy the amount deposited as
security for the crockery, knives, and forks.”


OF THE “PURE”-FINDERS.

Dogs’-dung is called “Pure,” from its cleansing and purifying
properties.

The name of “Pure-finders,” however, has been applied to the men
engaged in collecting dogs’-dung from the public streets only, within
the last 20 or 30 years. Previous to this period there appears to
have been no men engaged in the business, old women alone gathered
the substance, and they were known by the name of “bunters,” which
signifies properly gatherers of rags; and thus plainly intimates that
the rag-gatherers originally added the collecting of “Pure” to their
original and proper vocation. Hence it appears that the bone-grubbers,
rag-gatherers, and pure-finders, constituted formerly but one
class of people, and even now they have, as I have stated, kindred
characteristics.

The pure-finders meet with a ready market for all the dogs’-dung they
are able to collect, at the numerous tanyards in Bermondsey, where
they sell it by the stable-bucket full, and get from 8_d._ to 10_d._
per bucket, and sometimes 1_s._ and 1_s._ 2_d._ for it, according to
its quality. The “dry limy-looking sort” fetches the highest price
at some yards, as it is found to possess more of the alkaline, or
purifying properties; but others are found to prefer the dark moist
quality. Strange as it may appear, the preference for a particular kind
has suggested to the finders of Pure the idea of adulterating it to a
very considerable extent; this is effected by means of mortar broken
away from old walls, and mixed up with the whole mass, which it closely
resembles; in some cases, however, the mortar is rolled into small
balls similar to those found. Hence it would appear, that there is no
business or trade, however insignificant or contemptible, without its
own peculiar and appropriate tricks.

The pure-finders are in their habits and mode of proceeding nearly
similar to the bone-grubbers. Many of the pure-finders are, however,
better in circumstances, the men especially, as they earn more money.
They are also, to a certain extent, a better educated class. Some of
the regular collectors of this substance have been mechanics, and
others small tradesmen, who have been reduced. Those pure-finders who
have “a good connection,” and have been granted permission to cleanse
some kennels, obtain a very fair living at the business, earning from
10_s._ to 15_s._ a week. These, however, are very few; the majority
have to seek the article in the streets, and by such means they can
obtain only from 6_s._ to 10_s._ a week. The average weekly earnings of
this class are thought to be about 7_s._ 6_d._

From all the inquiries I have made on this subject, I have found that
there cannot be less than from 200 to 300 persons constantly engaged
solely in this business. There are about 30 tanyards large and small
in Bermondsey, and these all have their regular Pure collectors from
whom they obtain the article. Leomont and Roberts’s, Bavingtons’,
Beech’s, Murrell’s, Cheeseman’s, Powell’s, Jones’s, Jourdans’, Kent’s,
Moorcroft’s, and Davis’s, are among the largest establishments, and
some idea of the amount of business done in some of these yards may
be formed from the fact, that the proprietors severally employ from
300 to 500 tanners. At Leomont and Roberts’s there are 23 regular
street-finders, who supply them with pure, but this is a large
establishment, and the number supplying them is considered far beyond
the average quantity; moreover, Messrs. Leomont and Roberts do more
business in the particular branch of tanning in which the article
is principally used, viz., in dressing the leather for book-covers,
kid-gloves, and a variety of other articles. Some of the other
tanyards, especially the smaller ones, take the substance only as
they happen to want it, and others again employ but a limited number
of hands. If, therefore, we strike an average, and reduce the number
supplying each of the several yards to eight, we shall have 240 persons
regularly engaged in the business: besides these, it may be said that
numbers of the starving and destitute Irish have taken to picking up
the material, but not knowing where to sell it, or how to dispose of
it, they part with it for 2_d._ or 3_d._ the pail-full to the regular
purveyors of it to the tanyards, who of course make a considerable
profit by the transaction. The children of the poor Irish are usually
employed in this manner, but they also pick up rags and bones, and
anything else which may fall in their way.

I have stated that some of the pure-finders, especially the men, earn
a considerable sum of money per week; their gains are sometimes as
much as 15_s._; indeed I am assured that seven years ago, when they
got from 3_s._ to 4_s._ per pail for the pure, that many of them would
not exchange their position with that of the best paid mechanic in
London. Now, however, the case is altered, for there are twenty now at
the business for every one who followed it then; hence each collects
so much the less in quantity, and, moreover, from the competition gets
so much less for the article. Some of the collectors at present do not
earn 3_s._ per week, but these are mostly old women who are feeble and
unable to get over the ground quickly; others make 5_s._ and 6_s._ in
the course of the week, while the most active and those who clean out
the kennels of the dog fanciers may occasionally make 9_s._ and 10_s._
and even 15_s._ a week still, but this is of very rare occurrence.
Allowing the finders, one with the other, to earn on an average 5_s._
per week, it would give the annual earnings of each to be 13_l._,
while the income of the whole 200 would amount to 50_l._ a week, or
2600_l._ per annum. The kennel “pure” is not much valued, indeed many
of the tanners will not even buy it, the reason is that the dogs of
the “fanciers” are fed on almost anything, to save expense; the kennel
cleaners consequently take the precaution of mixing it with what is
found in the street, previous to offering it for sale.

The pure-finder may at once be distinguished from the bone-grubber and
rag-gatherer; the latter, as I have before mentioned, carries a bag,
and usually a stick armed with a spike, while he is most frequently
to be met with in back streets, narrow lanes, yards and other places,
where dust and rubbish are likely to be thrown out from the adjacent
houses. The pure-finder, on the contrary, is often found in the open
streets, as dogs wander where they like. The pure-finders always carry
a handle basket, generally with a cover, to hide the contents, and have
their right hand covered with a black leather glove; many of them,
however, dispense with the glove, as they say it is much easier to wash
their hands than to keep the glove fit for use. The women generally
have a large pocket for the reception of such rags as they may chance
to fall in with, but they pick up those only of the very best quality,
and will not go out of their way to search even for them. Thus equipped
they may be seen pursuing their avocation in almost every street in and
about London, excepting such streets as are now cleansed by the “street
orderlies,” of whom the pure-finders grievously complain, as being an
unwarrantable interference with the privileges of their class.

The pure collected is used by leather-dressers and tanners, and more
especially by those engaged in the manufacture of morocco and kid
leather from the skins of old and young goats, of which skins great
numbers are imported, and of the roans and lambskins which are the
sham morocco and kids of the “slop” leather trade, and are used by the
better class of shoemakers, bookbinders, and glovers, for the inferior
requirements of their business. Pure is also used by tanners, as is
pigeon’s dung, for the tanning of the thinner kinds of leather, such as
calf-skins, for which purpose it is placed in pits with an admixture of
lime and bark.

In the manufacture of moroccos and roans the pure is rubbed by the
hands of the workman into the skin he is dressing. This is done to
“purify” the leather, I was told by an intelligent leather-dresser, and
from that term the word “pure” has originated. The dung has astringent
as well as highly alkaline, or, to use the expression of my informant,
“scouring,” qualities. When the pure has been rubbed into the flesh and
grain of the skin (the “flesh” being originally the interior, and the
“grain” the exterior part of the cuticle), and the skin, thus purified,
has been hung up to be dried, the dung removes, as it were, all such
moisture as, if allowed to remain, would tend to make the leather
unsound or imperfectly dressed. This imperfect dressing, moreover,
gives a disagreeable smell to the leather--and leather-buyers often use
both nose and tongue in making their purchases--and would consequently
prevent that agreeable odour being imparted to the skin which is found
in some kinds of morocco and kid. The peculiar odour of the Russia
leather, so agreeable in the libraries of the rich, is derived from the
bark of young birch trees. It is now manufactured in Bermondsey.

Among the morocco manufacturers, especially among the old operatives,
there is often a scarcity of employment, and they then dress a few
roans, which they hawk to the cheap warehouses, or sell to the
wholesale shoemakers on their own account. These men usually reside in
small garrets in the poorer parts of Bermondsey, and carry on their
trade in their own rooms, using and keeping the pure there; hence
the “homes” of these poor men are peculiarly uncomfortable, if not
unhealthy. Some of these poor fellows or their wives collect the pure
themselves, often starting at daylight for the purpose; they more
frequently, however, buy it of a regular finder.

The number of pure-finders I heard estimated, by a man well acquainted
with the tanning and other departments of the leather trade, at from
200 to 250. The finders, I was informed by the same person, collected
about a pail-full a day, clearing 6_s._ a week in the summer--1_s._
and 1_s._ 2_d._ being the charge for a pail-full; in the short days
of winter, however, and in bad weather, they could not collect five
pail-fulls in a week.

In the wretched locality already referred to as lying between the Docks
and Rosemary-lane, redolent of filth and pregnant with pestilential
diseases, and whither all the outcasts of the metropolitan population
seem to be drawn, either in the hope of finding fitting associates and
companions in their wretchedness (for there is doubtlessly something
attractive and agreeable to them in such companionship), or else for
the purpose of hiding themselves and their shifts and struggles for
existence from the world,--in this dismal quarter, and branching from
one of the many narrow lanes which interlace it, there is a little
court with about half-a-dozen houses of the very smallest dimensions,
consisting of merely two rooms, one over the other. Here in one of
the upper rooms (the lower one of the same house being occupied by
another family and apparently _filled_ with little ragged children), I
discerned, after considerable difficulty, an old woman, a Pure-finder.
When I opened the door the little light that struggled through the
small window, the many broken panes of which were stuffed with old
rags, was not sufficient to enable me to perceive who or what was in
the room. After a short time, however, I began to make out an old
chair standing near the fire-place, and then to discover a poor old
woman resembling a bundle of rags and filth stretched on some dirty
straw in the corner of the apartment. The place was bare and almost
naked. There was nothing in it except a couple of old tin kettles and a
basket, and some broken crockeryware in the recess of the window. To my
astonishment I found this wretched creature to be, to a certain extent,
a “superior” woman; she could read and write well, spoke correctly, and
appeared to have been a person of natural good sense, though broken up
with age, want, and infirmity, so that she was characterized by all
that dull and hardened stupidity of manner which I have noticed in the
class. She made the following statement:--

“I am about 60 years of age. My father was a milkman, and very well
off; he had a barn and a great many cows. I was kept at school till I
was thirteen or fourteen years of age; about that time my father died,
and then I was taken home to help my mother in the business. After a
while things went wrong; the cows began to die, and mother, alleging
she could not manage the business herself, married again. I soon found
out the difference. Glad to get away, anywhere out of the house, I
married a sailor, and was very comfortable with him for some years; as
he made short voyages, and was often at home, and always left me half
his pay. At last he was pressed, when at home with me, and sent away;
I forget now where he was sent to, but I never saw him from that day
to this. The only thing I know is that some sailors came to me four
or five years after, and told me that he deserted from the ship in
which he had gone out, and got on board the _Neptune_, East Indiaman,
bound for Bombay, where he acted as boatswain’s mate; some little time
afterwards, he had got intoxicated while the ship was lying in harbour,
and, going down the side to get into a bumboat, and buy more drink,
he had fallen overboard and was drowned. I got some money that was
due to him from the India House, and, after that was all gone, I went
into service, in the Mile-end Road. There I stayed for several years,
till I met my second husband, who was bred to the water, too, but as a
waterman on the river. We did very well together for a long time, till
he lost his health. He became paralyzed like, and was deprived of the
use of all one side, and nearly lost the sight of one of his eyes; this
was not very conspicuous at first, but when we came to get pinched, and
to be badly off, then any one might have seen that there was something
the matter with his eye. Then we parted with everything we had in the
world; and, at last, when we had no other means of living left, we
were advised to take to gathering ‘Pure.’ At first I couldn’t endure
the business; I couldn’t bear to eat a morsel, and I was obliged to
discontinue it for a long time. My husband kept at it though, for he
could do _that_ well enough, only he couldn’t walk as fast as he ought.
He couldn’t lift his hands as high as his head, but he managed to work
under him, and so put the Pure in the basket. When I saw that he, poor
fellow, couldn’t make enough to keep us both, I took heart and went out
again, and used to gather more than he did; that’s fifteen years ago
now; the times were good then, and we used to do very well. If we only
gathered a pail-full in the day, we could live very well; but we could
do much more than that, for there wasn’t near so many at the business
then, and the Pure was easier to be had. For my part I can’t tell where
all the poor creatures have come from of late years; the world seems
growing worse and worse every day. They have pulled down the price of
Pure, that’s certain; but the poor things must do something, they can’t
starve while there’s anything to be got. Why, no later than six or
seven years ago, it was as high as 3_s._ 6_d._ and 4_s._ a pail-full,
and a ready sale for as much of it as you could get; but now you can
only get 1_s._ and in some places 1_s._ 2_d._ a pail-full; and, as
I said before, there are so many at it, that there is not much left
for a poor old creature like me to find. The men that are strong and
smart get the most, of course, and some of them do very well, at least
they manage to live. Six years ago, my husband complained that he was
ill, in the evening, and lay down in the bed--we lived in Whitechapel
then--he took a fit of coughing, and was smothered in his own blood. O
dear” (the poor old soul here ejaculated), “what troubles I have gone
through! I had eight children at one time, and there is not one of them
alive now. My daughter lived to 30 years of age, and then she died in
childbirth, and, since then, I have had nobody in the wide world to
care for me--none but myself, all alone as I am. After my husband’s
death I couldn’t do much, and all my things went away, one by one,
until I’ve nothing but bare walls, and that’s the reason why I was
vexed at first at your coming in, sir. I was yesterday out all day, and
went round Aldgate, Whitechapel, St. George’s East, Stepney, Bow, and
Bromley, and then came home; after that, I went over to Bermondsey,
and there I got only 6_d._ for my pains. To-day I wasn’t out at all;
I wasn’t well; I had a bad headache, and I’m so much afraid of the
fevers that are all about here--though I don’t know why I should be
afraid of them--I was lying down, when you came, to get rid of my
pains. There’s such a dizziness in my head now, I feel as if it didn’t
belong to me. No, I have earned no money to-day. I have had a piece
of dried bread that I steeped in water to eat. I haven’t eat anything
else to-day; but, pray, sir, don’t tell anybody of it. I could never
bear the thought of going into the ‘great house’ [workhouse]; I’m so
used to the air, that I’d sooner die in the street, as many I know have
done. I’ve known several of our people, who have sat down in the street
with their basket alongside them, and died. I knew one not long ago,
who took ill just as she was stooping down to gather up the Pure, and
fell on her face; she was taken to the London Hospital, and died at
three o’clock in the morning. I’d sooner die like them than be deprived
of my liberty, and be prevented from going about where I liked. No,
I’ll never go into the workhouse; my master is kind to me” [the tanner
whom she supplies]. “When I’m ill, he sometimes gives me a sixpence;
but there’s one gentleman has done us great harm, by forcing so many
into the business. He’s a poor-law guardian, and when any poor person
applies for relief, he tells them to go and gather Pure, and that
he’ll buy it of them (for he’s in the line), and so the parish, you
see, don’t have to give anything, and that’s one way that so many have
come into the trade of late, that the likes of me can do little or no
good at it. Almost every one I’ve ever known engaged at Pure-finding
were people who were better off once. I knew a man who went by the
name of Brown, who picked up Pure for years before I went to it; he
was a very quiet man; he used to lodge in Blue Anchor-yard, and seldom
used to speak to anybody. We two used to talk together sometimes,
but never much. One morning he was found dead in his bed; it was of
a Tuesday morning, and he was buried about 12 o’clock on the Friday
following. About 6 o’clock on that afternoon, three or four gentlemen
came searching all through this place, looking for a man named Brown,
and offering a reward to any who would find him out; there was a whole
crowd about them when I came up. One of the gentlemen said that the man
they wanted had lost the first finger of his right hand, and then I
knew that it was the man that had been buried only that morning. Would
you believe it, Mr. Brown was a real gentleman all the time, and had a
large estate, of I don’t know how many thousand pounds, just left him,
and the lawyers had advertised and searched everywhere for him, but
never found him, you may say, till he was dead. We discovered that his
name was not Brown; he had only taken that name to hide his real one,
which, of course, he did not want any one to know. I’ve often thought
of him, poor man, and all the misery he might have been spared, if the
good news had only come a year or two sooner.”

Another informant, a Pure-collector, was originally in the Manchester
cotton trade, and held a lucrative situation in a large country
establishment. His salary one year exceeded 250_l._, and his regular
income was 150_l._ “This,” he says, “I lost through drink and neglect.
My master was exceedingly kind to me, and has even assisted me since I
left his employ. He bore with me patiently for many years, but the love
of drink was so strong upon me that it was impossible for him to keep
me any longer.” He has often been drunk, he tells me, for three months
together; and he is now so reduced that he is ashamed to be seen. When
at his master’s it was his duty to carve and help the other assistants
belonging to the establishment, and his hand used to shake so violently
that he has been ashamed to lift the gravy spoon.

At breakfast he has frequently waited till all the young men had left
the table before he ventured to taste his tea; and immediately, when he
was alone, he has bent his head down to his cup to drink, being utterly
incapable of raising it to his lips. He says he is a living example of
the degrading influence of drink. All his friends have deserted him. He
has suffered enough, he tells me, to make him give it up. He earned the
week before I saw him 5_s._ 2_d._; and the week before that, 6_s._

Before leaving me I prevailed upon the man to “take the pledge.” This
is now eighteen months ago, and I have not seen him since.


OF THE CIGAR-END FINDERS.

There are, strictly speaking, none who make a living by picking up the
ends of cigars thrown away as useless by the smokers in the streets,
but there are very many who employ themselves from time to time in
collecting them. Almost all the street-finders, when they meet with
such things, pick them up, and keep them in a pocket set apart for
that purpose. The men allow the ends to accumulate till they amount to
two or three pounds weight, and then some dispose of them to a person
residing in the neighbourhood of Rosemary-lane, who buys them all
up at from 6_d._ to 10_d._ per pound, according to their length and
quality. The long ends are considered the best, as I am told there is
more sound tobacco in them, uninjured by the moisture of the mouth.
The children of the poor Irish, in particular, scour Ratcliff-highway,
the Commercial-road, Mile-end-road, and all the leading thoroughfares
of the East, and every place where cigar smokers are likely to take an
evening’s promenade. The quantity that each of them collects is very
trifling indeed--perhaps not more than a handful during a morning’s
search. I am informed, by an intelligent man living in the midst of
them, that these children go out in the morning not only to gather
cigar-ends, but to pick up out of dust bins, and from amongst rubbish
in the streets, the smallest scraps and crusts of bread, no matter how
hard or filthy they may be. These they put into a little bag which
they carry for the purpose, and, after they have gone their rounds
and collected whatever they can, they take the cigar-ends to the man
who buys them--sometimes getting not more than a halfpenny or a penny
for their morning’s collection. With this they buy a halfpenny or a
pennyworth of oatmeal, which they mix up with a large quantity of
water, and after washing and steeping the hard and dirty crusts, they
put them into the pot or kettle and boil all together. Of this mass the
whole family partake, and it often constitutes all the food they taste
in the course of the day. I have often seen the bone-grubbers eat the
black and soddened crusts they have picked up out of the gutter.

It would, indeed, be a hopeless task to make any attempt to get at the
number of persons who occasionally or otherwise pick up cigar-ends with
the view of selling them again. For this purpose almost all who ransack
the streets of London for a living may be computed as belonging to
the class; and to these should be added the children of the thousands
of destitute Irish who have inundated the metropolis within the last
few years, and who are to be found huddled together in all the low
neighbourhoods in every suburb of the City. What quantity is collected,
or the amount of money obtained for the ends, there are no means of
ascertaining.

Let us, however, make a conjecture. There are in round numbers
300,000 inhabited houses in the metropolis; and allowing the married
people living in apartments to be equal in number to the unmarried
“housekeepers,” we may compute that the number of families in London
is about the same as the inhabited houses. Assuming one young or old
gentleman in every ten of these families to smoke one cigar per diem in
the public thoroughfares, we have 30,000 cigar-ends daily, or 210,000
weekly cast away in the London streets. Now, reckoning 150 cigars to go
to a pound, we may assume that each end so cast away weighs about the
thousandth part of a pound; consequently the gross weight of the ends
flung into the gutter will, in the course of the week, amount to about
2 cwt.; and calculating that only a sixth part of these are picked up
by the finders, it follows that there is very nearly a ton of refuse
tobacco collected annually in the metropolitan thoroughfares.

The aristocratic quarters of the City and the vicinity of theatres
and casinos are the best for the cigar-end finders. In the Strand,
Regent-street, and the more fashionable thoroughfares, I am told,
there are many ends picked up; but even in these places they do not
exclusively furnish a means of living to any of the finders. All the
collectors sell them to some other person, who acts as middle-man
in the business. How he disposes of the ends is unknown, but it is
supposed that they are resold to some of the large manufacturers of
cigars, and go to form the component part of a new stock of the “best
Havannahs;” or, in other words, they are worked up again to be again
cast away, and again collected by the finders, and so on perhaps, till
the millennium comes. Some suppose them to be cut up and mixed with the
common smoking tobacco, and others that they are used in making snuff.
There are, I am assured, five persons residing in different parts of
London, who are known to purchase the cigar-ends.

In Naples the sale of cigar-ends is a regular street-traffic, the
street-seller carrying them in a small box suspended round the neck.
In Paris, also, _le Remasseur de Cigares_ is a well-known occupation:
the “ends” thus collected are sold as cheap tobacco to the poor. In
the low lodging-houses of London the ends, when dried, are cut up, and
frequently vended by the finders to such of their fellow-lodgers as are
anxious to enjoy their pipe at the cheapest possible rate.


OF THE OLD WOOD GATHERERS.

All that has been said of the cigar-end finders may, in a great
measure, apply to the wood-gatherers. No one can make a living
exclusively by the gathering of wood, and those who _do_ gather it,
gather as well rags, bones, and bits of metal. They gather it, indeed,
as an adjunct to their other findings, on the principle that “every
little helps.” Those, however, who most frequently look for wood are
the very old and feeble, and the very young, who are both unable to
travel far, or to carry a heavy burden, and they may occasionally be
seen crawling about in the neighbourhood of any new buildings in the
course of construction, or old ones in the course of demolition, and
picking up small odds and ends of wood and chips swept out amongst
dirt and shavings; these they deposit in a bag or basket which they
carry for that purpose. Should there happen to be what they call
“pulling-down work,” that is, taking down old houses, or palings, the
place is immediately beset by a number of wood-gatherers, young and
old, and in general all the poor people of the locality join with them,
to obtain their share of the spoil. What the poor get they take home
and burn, but the wood-gatherers sell all they procure for some small
trifle.

Some short time ago a portion of the wood-pavement in the city was
being removed; a large number of the old blocks, which were much worn
and of no further use, were thrown aside, and became the perquisite
of the wood-gatherers. During the repair of the street, the spot was
constantly besieged by a motley mob of men, women, and children, who,
in many instances, struggled and fought for the wood rejected as
worthless. This wood they either sold for a trifle as they got it, or
took home and split, and made into bundles for sale as firewood.

All the mudlarks (of whom I shall treat specially) pick up wood and
chips on the bank of the river; these they sell to poor people in their
own neighbourhood. They sometimes “find” large pieces of a greater
weight than they can carry; in such cases they get some other mudlark
to help them with the load, and the two “go halves” in the produce. The
only parties among the street-finders who do not pick up wood are the
Pure-collectors and the sewer-hunters, or, as they call themselves,
shore-workers, both of whom pass it by as of no value.

It is impossible to estimate the quantity of wood which is thus
gathered, or what the amount may be which the collector realises in the
course of the year.


OF THE DREDGERS, OR RIVER FINDERS.

The dredgermen of the Thames, or river finders, naturally occupy the
same place with reference to the street-finders, as the purlmen or
river beer-sellers do to those who get their living by selling in the
streets. It would be in itself a curious inquiry to trace the origin
of the manifold occupations in which men are found to be engaged in
the present day, and to note how promptly every circumstance and
occurrence was laid hold of, as it happened to arise, which appeared to
have any tendency to open up a new occupation, and to mark the gradual
progress, till it became a regularly-established employment, followed
by a separate class of people, fenced round by rules and customs of
their own, and who at length grew to be both in their habits and
peculiarities plainly distinct from the other classes among whom they
chanced to be located.

There has been no historian among the dredgers of the Thames to record
the commencement of the business, and the utmost that any of the
river-finders can tell is that his father had been a dredger, and so
had his father before him, and that _that’s_ the reason why they are
dredgers also. But no such people as dredgers were known on the Thames
in remote days; and before London had become an important trading
port, where nothing was likely to be got for the searching, it is not
probable that people would have been induced to search. In those days,
the only things searched for in the river were the bodies of persons
drowned, accidentally or otherwise. For this purpose, the Thames
fishermen of all others, appeared to be the best adapted. They were on
the spot at all times, and had various sorts of tackle, such as nets,
lines, hooks, &c. The fishermen well understood everything connected
with the river, such as the various sets of the tide, and the nature
of the bottom, and they were therefore on such occasions invariably
applied to for these purposes.

It is known to all who remember anything of Old London Bridge, that at
certain times of the tide, in consequence of the velocity with which
the water rushed through the narrow apertures which the arches then
afforded for its passage, to bring a boat in safety through the bridge
was a feat to be attempted only by the skilful and experienced. This
feat was known as “shooting” London Bridge; and it was no unusual thing
for accidents to happen even to the most expert. In fact, numerous
accidents occurred at this bridge, and at such times valuable articles
were sometimes lost, for which high rewards were offered to the finder.
Here again the fishermen came into requisition, the small drag-net,
which they used while rowing, offering itself for the purpose; for,
by fixing an iron frame round the mouth of the drag-net, this part
of it, from its specific gravity, sunk first to the bottom, and
consequently scraped along as they pulled forward, collecting into the
net everything that came in its way; when it was nearly filled, which
the rower always knew by the weight, it was hauled up to the surface,
its contents examined, and the object lost generally recovered.

It is thus apparent that the fishermen of the Thames were the men
originally employed as dredgermen; though casually, indeed, at first,
and according as circumstances occurred requiring their services. By
degrees, however, as the commerce of the river increased, and a greater
number of articles fell overboard from the shipping, they came to be
more frequently called into requisition, and so they were naturally led
to adopt the dredging as part and parcel of their business. Thus it
remains to the present day.

The fishermen all serve a regular apprenticeship, as they say
themselves, “duly and truly” for seven years. During the time of their
apprenticeship they are (or rather, in former times they _were_)
obliged to sleep in their master’s boat at night to take care of his
property, and were subject to many other curious regulations, which are
foreign to this subject.

I have said that the fishermen of the Thames to the present day unite
the dredging to their proper calling. By this I mean that they employ
themselves in fishing during the summer and autumn, either from
Barking Creek downwards, or from Chelsea Reach upwards, catching dabs,
flounders, eels, and other sorts of fish for the London markets. But in
winter when the days are short and cold, and the weather stormy, they
prefer stopping at home, and dredging the bed of the river for anything
they may chance to find. There are others, however, who have started
wholly in the dredging line, there being no hindrance or impediment
to any one doing so, nor any licence required for the purpose: these
dredge the river winter and summer alike, and are, in fact, the only
real dredgermen of the present day living solely by that occupation.

There are in all about 100 dredgermen at work on the river, and these
are located as follows:--

                                     Dredgermen.
  From Putney to Vauxhall there are      20
  From Vauxhall to London-bridge         40
  From London-bridge to Deptford         20
  And from Deptford to Gravesend         20
                                        ---
                                        100

All these reside, in general, on the south side of the Thames, the two
places most frequented by them being Lambeth and Rotherhithe. They do
not, however, confine themselves to the neighbourhoods wherein they
reside, but extend their operations to all parts of the river, where
it is likely that they may pick up anything; and it is perfectly
marvellous with what rapidity the intelligence of any accident
calculated to afford them employment is spread among them; for should
a loaded coal barge be sunk over night, by daylight the next morning
every dredgerman would be sure to be upon the spot, prepared to collect
what he could from the wreck at the bottom of the river.

The boats of the dredgermen are of a peculiar shape. They have no
stern, but are the same fore and aft. They are called Peter boats,
but not one of the men with whom I spoke had the least idea as to the
origin of the name. These boats are to be had at almost all prices,
according to their condition and age--from 30_s._ to 20_l._ The boats
used by the fishermen dredgermen are decidedly the most valuable. One
with the other, perhaps the whole may average 10_l._ each; and this sum
will give 1000_l._ as the value of the entire number. A complete set
of tackle, including drags, will cost 2_l._, which comes to 200_l._
for all hands; and thus we have the sum of 1200_l._ as the amount of
capital invested in the dredging of the Thames.

It is by no means an easy matter to form any estimate of the earnings
of the dredgermen, as they are a matter of mere chance. In former
years, when Indiamen and all the foreign shipping lay in the river,
the river finders were in the habit of doing a good business, not only
in their own line, through the greater quantities of rope, bones,
and other things which then were thrown or fell overboard, but they
also contrived to smuggle ashore great quantities of tobacco, tea,
spirits, and other contraband articles, and thought it a bad day’s work
when they did not earn a pound independent of their dredging. An old
dredger told me he had often in those days made 5_l._ before breakfast
time. After the excavation of the various docks, and after the larger
shipping had departed from the river, the finders were obliged to
content themselves with the chances of mere dredging; and even then, I
am informed, they were in the habit of earning one week with another
throughout the year, about 25_s._ per week, each, or 6500_l._ per annum
among all. Latterly, however, the earnings of these men have greatly
fallen off, especially in the summer, for then they cannot get so good
a price for the coal they find as in the winter--6_d._ per bushel being
the summer price; and, as they consider three bushels a good day’s
work, their earnings at this period of the year amount only to 1_s._
6_d._ per day, excepting when they happen to pick up some bones or
pieces of metal, or to find a dead body for which there is a reward. In
the winter, however, the dredgermen can readily get 1_s._ per bushel
for all the coals they find; and far more coals are to be found then
than in summer, for there are more colliers in the river, and far more
accidents at that season. Coal barges are often sunk in the winter,
and on such occasions they make a good harvest. Moreover there is the
finding of bodies, for which they not only get the reward, but 5_s._,
which they call inquest money; together with many other chances, such
as the finding of money and valuables among the rubbish they bring up
from the bottom; but as the last-mentioned are accidents happening
throughout the year, I am inclined to think that they have understated
the amount which they are in the habit of realizing even in the summer.

The dredgers, as a class, may be said to be altogether uneducated, not
half a dozen out of the whole number being able to read their own name,
and only one or two to write it; this select few are considered by the
rest as perfect prodigies. “Lor’ bless you!” said one, “I on’y wish
you’d ’ear Bill S---- read; I on’y jist wish you’d ’ear him. Why that
ere Bill can read faster nor a dog can trot. And, what’s more, I seed
him write an ole letter hisself, ev’ry word on it! What do you think
o’ that now?” The ignorance of the dredgermen may be accounted for by
the men taking so early to the water; the bustle and excitement of the
river being far more attractive to them than the routine of a school.
Almost as soon as they are able to do anything, the dredgermen’s boys
are taken by their fathers afloat to assist in picking out the coals,
bones, and other things of any use, from the midst of the rubbish
brought up in their drag-nets; or else the lads are sent on board
as assistants to one or other of the fishermen during their fishing
voyages. When once engaged in this way it has been found impossible
afterwards to keep the youths from the water; and if they have learned
anything previously they very soon forget it.

It might be expected that the dredgers, in a manner depending on
chance for their livelihood, and leading a restless sort of life on
the water, would closely resemble the costermongers in their habits;
but it is far otherwise. There can be no two classes more dissimilar,
except in their hatred of restraint. The dredgers are sober and steady;
gambling is unknown amongst them; and they are, to an extraordinary
degree, laborious, persevering, and patient. They are in general men of
short stature, but square built, strong, and capable of enduring great
fatigue, and have a silent and thoughtful look. Being almost always
alone, and studying how they may best succeed in finding what they
seek, marking the various sets of the tide, and the direction in which
things falling into the water at a particular place must necessarily
be carried, they become the very opposite to the other river people,
especially to the watermen, who are brawling and clamorous, and delight
in continually “chaffing” each other. In consequence of the sober and
industrious habits of the dredgermen their homes are, as they say,
“pretty fair” for working men, though there is nothing very luxurious
to be found in them, nor indeed anything beyond what is absolutely
necessary. After their day’s work, especially if they have “done well,”
these men smoke a pipe over a pint or two of beer at the nearest
public-house, get home early to bed, and if the tide answers may be
found on the river patiently dredging away at two or three o’clock in
the morning.

Whenever a loaded coal barge happens to sink, as I have already
intimated, it is surprising how short a time elapses before that part
of the river is alive with the dredgers. They flock thither from all
parts. The river on such occasions presents a very animated appearance.
At first they are all in a group, and apparently in confusion, crossing
and re-crossing each other’s course; some with their oars pulled in
while they examine the contents of their nets, and empty the coals
into the bottom of their boats; others rowing and tugging against the
stream, to obtain an advantageous position for the next cast; and when
they consider they have found this, down go the dredging-nets to the
bottom, and away they row again with the stream, as if pulling for a
wager, till they find by the weight of their net that it is full; then
they at once stop, haul it to the surface, and commence another course.
Others who have been successful in getting their boats loaded may be
seen pushing away from the main body, and making towards the shore.
Here they busily employ themselves, with what help they can get, in
emptying the boat of her cargo--carrying it ashore in old coal baskets,
bushel measures, or anything else which will suit their purpose; and
when this is completed they pull out again to join their comrades, and
commence afresh. They continue working thus till the returning tide
puts an end to their labours, but these are resumed after the tide has
fallen to a certain depth; and so they go on, working night and day
while there is anything to be got.

The dredgerman and his boat may be immediately distinguished from
all others; there is nothing similar to them on the river. The sharp
cutwater fore and aft, and short rounded appearance of the vessel,
marks it out at once from the skiff or wherry of the waterman. There
is, too, always the appearance of labour about the boat, like a ship
returning after a long voyage, daubed and filthy, and looking sadly in
need of a thorough cleansing. The grappling irons are over the bow,
resting on a coil of rope; while the other end of the boat is filled
with coals, bones, and old rope, mixed with the mud of the river. The
ropes of the dredging-net hang over the side. A short stout figure,
with a face soiled and blackened with perspiration, and surmounted by a
tarred sou’-wester, the body habited in a soiled check shirt, with the
sleeves turned up above the elbows, and exhibiting a pair of sunburnt
brawny arms, is pulling at the sculls, not with the ease and lightness
of the waterman, but toiling and tugging away like a galley slave, as
he scours the bed of the river with his dredging-net in search of some
hoped-for prize.

The dredgers, as was before stated, are the men who find almost all
the bodies of persons drowned. If there be a reward offered for the
recovery of a body, numbers of the dredgers will at once endeavour to
obtain it, while if there be no reward, there is at least the inquest
money to be had--beside other chances. What these chances are may
be inferred from the well-known fact, that no body recovered by a
dredgerman ever happens to have any money about it, when brought to
shore. There may, indeed, be a watch in the fob or waistcoat pocket,
for that article would be likely to be traced. There may, too, be a
purse or pocket-book forthcoming, but somehow it is invariably empty.
The dredgers cannot by any reasoning or argument be made to comprehend
that there is anything like dishonesty in emptying the pockets of a
dead man. They consider them as their just perquisites. They say that
any one who finds a body does precisely the same, and that if they
did not do so the police would. After having had all the trouble and
labour, they allege that they have a much better right to whatever
is to be got, than the police who have had nothing whatever to do
with it. There are also people who shrewdly suspect that some of the
coals from the barges lying in the river, very often find their way
into the dredgers’ boats, especially when the dredgers are engaged in
night-work; and there are even some who do not hold them guiltless of,
now and then, when opportunity offers, smuggling things ashore from
many of the steamers coming from foreign parts. But such things, I
repeat, the dredgers consider in the fair way of their business.

One of the most industrious, and I believe one of the most skilful and
successful of this peculiar class, gave me the following epitome of his
history.

“Father was a dredger, and grandfather afore him; grandfather was a
dredger and a fisherman too. A’most as soon as I was able to crawl,
father took me with him in the boat to help him to pick the coals, and
bones, and other things out of the net, and to use me to the water.
When I got bigger and stronger, I was sent to the parish school, but I
didn’t like it half as well as the boat, and couldn’t be got to stay
two days together. At last I went above bridge, and went along with a
fisherman, and used to sleep in the boat every night. I liked to sleep
in the boat; I used to be as comfortable as could be. Lor bless you!
there’s a tilt to them boats, and no rain can’t git at you. I used to
lie awake of a night in them times, and listen to the water shipping
ag’in the boat, and think it fine fun. I might a got bound ’prentice,
but I got aboard a smack, where I stayed three or four year, and if I’d
a stayed there, I’d a liked it much better. But I heerd as how father
was ill, so I com’d home, and took to the dredging, and am at it off
and on ever since. I got no larnin’, how could I? There’s on’y one or
two of us dredgers as knows anything of larnin’, and they’re no better
off than the rest. Larnin’s no use to a dredger, he hasn’t got no time
to read; and if he had, why it wouldn’t tell him where the holes and
furrows is at the bottom of the river, and where things is to be found.
To be sure there’s holes and furrows at the bottom. I know a good many.
I know a furrow off Lime’us Point, no wider nor the dredge, and I can
go there, and when others can’t git anything but stones and mud, I
can git four or five bushel o’ coal. You see they lay there; they get
in with the set of the tide, and can’t git out so easy like. Dredgers
don’t do so well now as they used to do. You know Pelican Stairs?
well, before the Docks was built, when the ships lay there, I could
go under Pelican Pier and pick up four or five shilling of a morning.
What was that tho’ to father? I hear him say he often made 5_l._ afore
breakfast, and nobody ever the wiser. Them were fine times! there was
a good livin’ to be picked up on the water them days. About ten year
ago, the fishermen at Lambeth, them as sarves their time ‘duly and
truly’ thought to put us off the water, and went afore the Lord Mayor,
but they couldn’t do nothink after all. They do better nor us, as they
go fishin’ all the summer, when the dredgin’ is bad, and come back in
winter. Some on us down here” [Rotherhithe] “go a deal-portering in the
summer, or unloading ’tatoes, or anything else we can get; when we have
nothin’ else to do, we go on the river. Father don’t dredge now, he’s
too old for that; it takes a man to be strong to dredge, so father goes
to ship scrapin’. He on’y sits on a plank outside the ship, and scrapes
off the old tar with a scraper. We does very well for all that--why he
can make his half a bull a day [2_s._ 6_d._] when he gits work, but
that’s not always; howsomever I helps the old man at times, when I’m
able. I’ve found a good many bodies. I got a many rewards, and a tidy
bit of inquest money. There’s 5_s._ 6_d._ inquest money at Rotherhithe,
and on’y a shillin’ at Deptford; I can’t make out how that is, but
that’s all they give, I know. I never finds anythink on the bodies. Lor
bless you! people don’t have anythink in their pockets when they gits
drowned, they are not such fools as all that. Do you see them two marks
there on the back of my hand? Well, one day--I was on’y young then--I
was grabblin’ for old rope in Church Hole, when I brings up a body, and
just as I was fixing the rope on his leg to tow him ashore, two swells
comes down in a skiff, and lays hold of the painter of my boat, and
tows me ashore. The hook of the drag went right thro’ the trowsers of
the drowned man and my hand, and I couldn’t let go no how, and tho’ I
roared out like mad, the swells didn’t care, but dragged me into the
stairs. When I got there, my arm, and the corpse’s shoe and trowsers,
was all kivered with my blood. What do you think the gents said?--why,
they told me as how they had done me good, in towin’ the body in, and
ran away up the stairs. Tho’ times ain’t near so good as they was, I
manages purty tidy, and hasn’t got no occasion to hollor much; but
there’s some of the dredgers as would hollor, if they was ever so well
off.”


OF THE SEWER-HUNTERS.

Some few years ago, the main sewers, having their outlets on the river
side, were completely open, so that any person desirous of exploring
their dark and uninviting recesses might enter at the river side, and
wander away, provided he could withstand the combination of villanous
stenches which met him at every step, for many miles, in any direction.
At that time it was a thing of very frequent occurrence, especially
at the spring tides, for the water to rush into the sewers, pouring
through them like a torrent, and then to burst up through the gratings
into the streets, flooding all the low-lying districts in the vicinity
of the river, till the streets of Shadwell and Wapping resembled a
Dutch town, intersected by a series of muddy canals. Of late, however,
to remedy this defect, the Commissioners have had a strong brick wall
built within the entrance to the several sewers. In each of these brick
walls there is an opening covered by a strong iron door, which hangs
from the top and is so arranged that when the tide is low the rush of
the water and other filth on the inner side, forces it back and allows
the contents of the sewer to pass into the river, whilst when the tide
rises the door is forced so close against the wall by the pressure of
the water outside that none can by any possibility enter, and thus the
river neighbourhoods are secured from the deluges which were heretofore
of such frequent occurrence.

Were it not a notorious fact, it might perhaps be thought impossible,
that men could be found who, for the chance of obtaining a living of
some sort or other, would, day after day, and year after year, continue
to travel through these underground channels for the offscouring of
the city; but such is the case even at the present moment. In former
times, however, this custom prevailed much more than now, for in those
days the sewers were entirely open and presented no obstacle to any
one desirous of entering them. Many wondrous tales are still told
among the people of men having lost their way in the sewers, and of
having wandered among the filthy passages--their lights extinguished
by the noisome vapours--till, faint and overpowered, they dropped down
and died on the spot. Other stories are told of sewer-hunters beset
by myriads of enormous rats, and slaying thousands of them in their
struggle for life, till at length the swarms of the savage things
overpowered them, and in a few days afterwards their skeletons were
discovered picked to the very bones. Since the iron doors, however,
have been placed on the main sewers a prohibition has been issued
against entering them, and a reward of 5_l._ offered to any person
giving information so as to lead to the conviction of any offender.
Nevertheless many still travel through these foul labyrinths, in search
of such valuables as may have found their way down the drains.

The persons who are in the habit of searching the sewers, call
themselves “shore-men” or “shore-workers.” They belong, in a certain
degree, to the same class as the “mud-larks,” that is to say,
they travel through the mud along shore in the neighbourhood of
ship-building and ship-breaking yards, for the purpose of picking
up copper nails, bolts, iron, and old rope. The shore-men, however,
do not collect the lumps of coal and wood they meet with on their
way, but leave them as the proper perquisites of the mud-larks. The
sewer-hunters were formerly, and indeed are still, called by the name
of “Toshers,” the articles which they pick up in the course of their
wanderings along shore being known among themselves by the general
term “tosh,” a word more particularly applied by them to anything made
of copper. These “Toshers” may be seen, especially on the Surrey side
of the Thames, habited in long greasy velveteen coats, furnished with
pockets of vast capacity, and their nether limbs encased in dirty
canvas trowsers, and any old slops of shoes, that may be fit only for
wading through the mud. They carry a bag on their back, and in their
hand a pole seven or eight feet long, on one end of which there is
a large iron hoe. The uses of this instrument are various; with it
they try the ground wherever it appears unsafe, before venturing on
it, and, when assured of its safety, walk forward steadying their
footsteps with the staff. Should they, as often happens, even to the
most experienced, sink in some quagmire, they immediately throw out the
long pole armed with the hoe, which is always held uppermost for this
purpose, and with it seizing hold of any object within their reach,
are thereby enabled to draw themselves out; without the pole, however,
their danger would be greater, for the more they struggled to extricate
themselves from such places, the deeper they would sink; and even with
it, they might perish, I am told, in some part, if there were nobody
at hand to render them assistance. Finally, they make use of this
pole to rake about the mud when searching for iron, copper, rope, and
bones. They mostly exhibit great skill in discovering these things in
unlikely places, and have a knowledge of the various sets of the tide,
calculated to carry articles to particular points, almost equal to the
dredgermen themselves. Although they cannot “pick up” as much now as
they formerly did, they are still able to make what they call a fair
living, and can afford to look down with a species of aristocratic
contempt on the puny efforts of their less fortunate brethren the
“mudlarks.”

To enter the sewers and explore them to any considerable distance is
considered, even by those acquainted with what is termed “working
the shores,” an adventure of no small risk. There are a variety of
perils to be encountered in such places. The brick-work in many
parts--especially in the old sewers--has become rotten through the
continual action of the putrefying matter and moisture, and parts have
fallen down and choked up the passage with heaps of rubbish; over these
obstructions, nevertheless, the sewer-hunters have to scramble “in
the best way they can.” In such parts they are careful not to touch
the brick-work over head, for the slightest tap might bring down an
avalanche of old bricks and earth, and severely injure them, if not
bury them in the rubbish. Since the construction of the new sewers, the
old ones are in general abandoned by the “hunters;” but in many places
the former channels cross and re-cross those recently constructed,
and in the old sewers a person is very likely to lose his way. It is
dangerous to venture far into any of the smaller sewers branching
off from the main, for in this the “hunters” have to stoop low down
in order to proceed; and, from the confined space, there are often
accumulated in such places, large quantities of foul air, which, as
one of them stated, will “cause instantious death.” Moreover, far from
there being any romance in the tales told of the rats, these vermin are
really numerous and formidable in the sewers, and have been known, I am
assured, to attack men when alone, and even sometimes when accompanied
by others, with such fury that the people have escaped from them with
difficulty. They are particularly ferocious and dangerous, if they
be driven into some corner whence they cannot escape, when they will
immediately fly at any one that opposes their progress. I received a
similar account to this from one of the London flushermen. There are
moreover, in some quarters, ditches or trenches which are filled as the
water rushes up the sewers with the tide; in these ditches the water is
retained by a sluice, which is shut down at high tide, and lifted again
at low tide, when it rushes down the sewers with all the violence of a
mountain torrent, sweeping everything before it. If the sewer-hunter be
not close to some branch sewer, so that he can run into it, whenever
the opening of these sluices takes place, he must inevitably perish.
The trenches or water reservoirs for the cleansing of the sewers are
chiefly on the south side of the river, and, as a proof of the great
danger to which the sewer-hunters are exposed in such cases, it may
be stated, that not very long ago, a sewer on the south side of the
Thames was opened to be repaired; a long ladder reached to the bottom
of the sewer, down which the bricklayer’s labourer was going with a
hod of bricks, when the rush of water from the sluice, struck the
bottom of the ladder, and instantly swept away ladder, labourer, and
all. The bricklayer fortunately was enjoying his “pint and pipe” at
a neighbouring public-house. The labourer was found by my informant,
a “shore-worker,” near the mouth of the sewer quite dead, battered,
and disfigured in a frightful manner. There was likewise great danger
in former times from the rising of the tide in the sewers, so that it
was necessary for the shore-men to have quitted them before the water
had got any height within the entrance. At present, however, this is
obviated in those sewers where the main is furnished with an iron door
towards the river.

The shore-workers, when about to enter the sewers, provide themselves,
in addition to the long hoe already described, with a canvas apron,
which they tie round them, and a dark lantern similar to a policeman’s;
this they strap before them on their right breast, in such a manner
that on removing the shade, the bull’s-eye throws the light straight
forward when they are in an erect position, and enables them to
see everything in advance of them for some distance; but when they
stoop, it throws the light directly under them, so that they can then
distinctly see any object at their feet. The sewer-hunters usually
go in gangs of three or four for the sake of company, and in order
that they may be the better able to defend themselves from the rats.
The old hands who have been often up (and every gang endeavours to
include at least one experienced person), travel a long distance, not
only through the main sewers, but also through many of the branches.
Whenever the shore-men come near a street grating, they close their
lanterns and watch their opportunity of gliding silently past
unobserved, for otherwise a crowd might collect over head and intimate
to the policeman on duty, that there were persons wandering in the
sewers below. The shore-workers never take dogs with them, lest their
barking when hunting the rats might excite attention. As the men go
along they search the bottom of the sewer, raking away the mud with
their hoe, and pick, from between the crevices of the brick-work,
money, or anything else that may have lodged there. There are in many
parts of the sewers holes where the brick-work has been worn away,
and in these holes clusters of articles are found, which have been
washed into them from time to time, and perhaps been collecting there
for years; such as pieces of iron, nails, various scraps of metal,
coins of every description, all rusted into a mass like a rock, and
weighing from a half hundred to two hundred weight altogether. These
“conglomerates” of metal are too heavy for the men to take out of
the sewers, so that if unable to break them up, they are compelled
to leave them behind; and there are very many such masses, I am
informed, lying in the sewers at this moment, of immense weight, and
growing larger every day by continual additions. The shore-men find
great quantities of money--of copper money especially; sometimes they
dive their arm down to the elbow in the mud and filth and bring up
shillings, sixpences, half-crowns, and occasionally half-sovereigns
and sovereigns. They always find the coins standing edge uppermost
between the bricks in the bottom, where the mortar has been worn away.
The sewer-hunters occasionally find plate, such as spoons, ladles,
silver-handled knives and forks, mugs and drinking cups, and now and
then articles of jewellery; but even while thus “in luck” as they call
it, they do not omit to fill the bags on their backs with the more
cumbrous articles they meet with--such as metals of every description,
rope and bones. There is always a great quantity of these things to be
met with in the sewers, they being continually washed down from the
cesspools and drains of the houses. When the sewer-hunters consider
they have searched long enough, or when they have found as much as they
can conveniently take away, the gang leave the sewers and, adjourning
to the nearest of their homes, count out the money they have picked
up, and proceed to dispose of the old metal, bones, rope, &c.; this
done, they then, as they term it, “whack” the whole lot; that is, they
divide it equally among all hands. At these divisions, I am assured,
it frequently occurs that each member of the gang will realise from
30_s._ to 2_l._--this at least _was_ a frequent occurrence some few
years ago. Of late, however, the shore-men are obliged to use far more
caution, as the police, and especially those connected with the river,
who are more on the alert, as well as many of the coal-merchants in the
neighbourhood of the sewers, would give information if they saw any
suspicious persons approaching them.

The principal localities in which the shore-hunters reside
are in Mint-square, Mint-street, and Kent-street, in the
Borough--Snow’s-fields, Bermondsey--and that never-failing locality
between the London Docks and Rosemary-lane which appears to be a
concentration of all the misery of the kingdom. There were known to be
a few years ago nearly 200 sewer-hunters, or “toshers,” and, incredible
as it may appear, I have satisfied myself that, taking one week with
another, they could not be said to make much short of 2_l._ per week.
Their probable gains, I was told, were about 6_s._ per day all the year
round. At this rate the property recovered from the sewers of London
would have amounted to no less than 20,000_l._ per annum, which would
make the amount of property lost down the drains of each house amount
to 1_s._ 4_d._ a year. The shore-hunters of the present day greatly
complain of the recent restrictions, and inveigh in no measured terms
against the constituted authorities. “They won’t let us in to work the
shores,” say they, “’cause there’s a little danger. They fears as how
we’ll get suffocated, at least they tells us so; but they don’t care if
we get starved! no, they doesn’t mind nothink about that.”

It is, however, more than suspected that these men find plenty of means
to evade the vigilance of the sewer officials, and continue quietly to
reap a considerable harvest, gathered whence it might otherwise have
rotted in obscurity.

The sewer-hunters, strange as it may appear, are certainly smart
fellows, and take decided precedence of all the other “finders” of
London, whether by land or water, both on account of the greater amount
of their earnings, and the skill and courage they manifest in the
pursuit of their dangerous employment. But like all who make a living
as it were by a game of chance, plodding, carefulness, and saving
habits cannot be reckoned among their virtues; they are improvident,
even to a proverb. With their gains, superior even to those of the
better-paid artizans, and far beyond the amount received by many
clerks, who have to maintain a “respectable appearance,” the shore-men
might, with but ordinary prudence, live well, have comfortable homes,
and even be able to save sufficient to provide for themselves in
their old age. Their practice, however, is directly the reverse. They
no sooner make a “haul,” as they say, than they adjourn to some low
public-house in the neighbourhood, and seldom leave till empty pockets
and hungry stomachs drive them forth to procure the means for a fresh
debauch. It is principally on this account that, despite their large
gains, they are to be found located in the most wretched quarter of the
metropolis.

It might be supposed that the sewer-hunters (passing much of their time
in the midst of the noisome vapours generated by the sewers, the odour
of which, escaping upwards from the gratings in the streets, is dreaded
and shunned by all as something pestilential) would exhibit in their
pallid faces the unmistakable evidence of their unhealthy employment.
But this is far from the fact. Strange to say, the sewer-hunters are
strong, robust, and healthy men, generally florid in their complexion,
while many of them know illness only by name. Some of the elder men,
who head the gangs when exploring the sewers, are between 60 and 80
years of age, and have followed the employment during their whole
lives. The men appear to have a fixed belief that the odour of the
sewers contributes in a variety of ways to their general health;
nevertheless, they admit that accidents occasionally occur from the air
in some places being fully impregnated with mephitic gas.

I found one of these men, from whom I derived much information, and
who is really an active intelligent man, in a court off Rosemary-lane.
Access is gained to this court through a dark narrow entrance, scarcely
wider than a doorway, running beneath the first floor of one of the
houses in the adjoining street. The court itself is about 50 yards
long, and not more than three yards wide, surrounded by lofty wooden
houses, with jutting abutments in many of the upper stories that
almost exclude the light, and give them the appearance of being about
to tumble down upon the heads of the intruders. This court is densely
inhabited; every room has its own family, more or less in number; and
in many of them, I am assured, there are two families residing, the
better to enable the one to whom the room is let to pay the rent. At
the time of my visit, which was in the evening, after the inmates had
returned from their various employments, some quarrel had arisen among
them. The court was so thronged with the friends of the contending
individuals and spectators of the fight that I was obliged to stand
at the entrance, unable to force my way through the dense multitude,
while labourers and street-folk with shaggy heads, and women with dirty
caps and fuzzy hair, thronged every window above, and peered down
anxiously at the affray. There must have been some hundreds of people
collected there, and yet all were inhabitants of this very court, for
the noise of the quarrel had not yet reached the street. On wondering
at the number, my informant, when the noise had ceased, explained the
matter as follows: “You see, sir, there’s more than 30 houses in this
here court, and there’s not less than eight rooms in every house; now
there’s nine or ten people in some of the rooms, I knows, but just say
four in every room, and calculate what that there comes to.” I did, and
found it, to my surprise, to be 960. “Well,” continued my informant,
chuckling and rubbing his hands in evident delight at the result, “you
may as well just tack a couple a hundred on to the tail o’ them for
make-weight, as we’re not werry pertikler about a hundred or two one
way or the other in these here places.”

In this court, up three flights of narrow stairs that creaked and
trembled at every footstep, and in an ill-furnished garret, dwelt the
shore-worker--a man who, had he been careful, according to his own
account at least, might have money in the bank and be the proprietor of
the house in which he lived. The sewer-hunters, like the street-people,
are all known by some peculiar nickname, derived chiefly from some
personal characteristic. It would be a waste of time to inquire for
them by their right names, even if you were acquainted with them, for
none else would know them, and no intelligence concerning them could
be obtained; while under the title of Lanky Bill, Long Tom, One-eyed
George, Short-armed Jack, they are known to every one.

My informant, who is also dignified with a title, or as he calls it
a “handle to his name,” gave me the following account of himself: “I
was born in Birmingham, but afore I recollects anythink, we came to
London. The first thing I remembers is being down on the shore at
Cuckold’s P’int, when the tide was out and up to my knees in mud, and a
gitting down deeper and deeper every minute till I was picked up by one
of the shore-workers. I used to git down there every day, to look at
the ships and boats a sailing up and down; I’d niver be tired a looking
at them at that time. At last father ’prenticed me to a blacksmith in
Bermondsey, _and then I couldn’t git down to the river when I liked,
so I got to hate the forge and the fire, and blowing the bellows, and
couldn’t stand the confinement no how,--at last I cuts and runs_. After
some time they gits me back ag’in, but I cuts ag’in. I was determined
not to stand it. I wouldn’t go home for fear I’d be sent back, so I
goes down to Cuckold’s P’int and there I sits near half the day, when
who should I see but the old un as had picked me up out of the mud when
I was a sinking. I tells him all about it, and he takes me home along
with hisself, and gits me a bag and an o, and takes me out next day,
and shows me what to do, and shows me the dangerous places, and the
places what are safe, and how to rake in the mud for rope, and bones,
and iron, and that’s the way I comed to be a shore-worker. Lor’ bless
you, I’ve worked Cuckold’s P’int for more nor twenty year. I know
places where you’d go over head and ears in the mud, and jist alongside
on ’em you may walk as safe as you can on this floor. But it don’t do
for a stranger to try it, he’d wery soon git in, and it’s not so easy
to git out agin, I can tell you. I stay’d with the old un a long time,
and we used to git lots o’ tin, specially when we’d go to work the
sewers. I liked that well enough. I could git into small places where
the old un couldn’t, and when I’d got near the grating in the street,
I’d search about in the bottom of the sewer; I’d put down my arm to my
shoulder in the mud and bring up shillings and half-crowns, and lots
of coppers, and plenty other things. I once found a silver jug as big
as a quart pot, and often found spoons and knives and forks and every
thing you can think of. Bless your heart the smells nothink; it’s a
roughish smell at first, but nothink near so bad as you thinks, ’cause,
you see, there’s sich lots o’ water always a coming down the sewer,
and the air gits in from the gratings, and that helps to sweeten it a
bit. There’s some places, ’specially in the old sewers, where they say
there’s foul air, and they tells me the foul air ’ill cause instantious
death, but I niver met with anythink of the kind, and I think if there
was sich a thing I should know somethink about it, for I’ve worked the
sewers, off and on, for twenty year. When we comes to a narrow-place
as we don’t know, we takes the candle out of the lantern and fastens
it on the hend of the o, and then runs it up the sewer, and if the
light stays in, we knows as there a’n’t no danger. We used to go up
the city sewer at Blackfriars-bridge, but that’s stopped up now; it’s
boarded across inside. The city wouldn’t let us up if they knew it,
’cause of the danger, they say, but they don’t care if we hav’n’t got
nothink to eat nor a place to put our heads in, while there’s plenty
of money lying there and good for nobody. If you was caught up it and
brought afore the Lord Mayor, he’d give you fourteen days on it, as
safe as the bellows, so a good many on us now is afraid to wenture in.
We don’t wenture as we used to, but still it’s done at times. There’s
a many places as I knows on where the bricks has fallen down, and that
there’s dangerous; it’s so delaberated that if you touches it with your
head or with the hend of the o, it ’ill all come down atop o’ you. I’ve
often seed as many as a hundred rats at once, and they’re woppers in
the sewers, I can tell you; them there water rats, too, is far more
ferociouser than any other rats, and they’d think nothink of tackling
a man, if they found they couldn’t get away no how, but if they can
why they runs by and gits out o’ the road. I knows a chap as the rats
tackled in the sewers; they bit him hawfully: you must ha’ heard on it;
it was him as the watermen went in arter when they heard him a shouting
as they was a rowin’ by. Only for the watermen the rats would ha’ done
for him, safe enough. Do you recollect hearing on the man as was found
in the sewers about twelve year ago?--oh you must--the rats eat every
bit of him, and left nothink but his bones. I knowed him well, he was a
rig’lar shore-worker.

“The rats is wery dangerous, that’s sartain, but we always goes three
or four on us together, and the varmint’s too wide awake to tackle us
then, for they know they’d git off second best. You can go a long way
in the sewers if you like; I don’t know how far. I niver was at the
end on them myself, for a cove can’t stop in longer than six or seven
hour, ’cause of the tide; you must be out before that’s up. There’s a
many branches on ivery side, but we don’t go into all; we go where we
know, and where we’re always sure to find somethink. I know a place
now where there’s more than two or three hundred weight of metal all
rusted together, and plenty of money among it too; but it’s too heavy
to carry it out, so it ’ill stop there I s’pose till the world comes
to an end. I often brought out a piece of metal half a hundred in
weight, and took it under the harch of the bridge, and broke it up with
a large stone to pick out the money. I’ve found sovereigns and half
sovereigns over and over ag’in, and three on us has often cleared a
couple of pound apiece in one day out of the sewers. But we no sooner
got the money than the publican had it. I only wish I’d back all the
money I’ve guv to the publican, and I wouldn’t care how the wind blew
for the rest of my life. I never thought about taking a hammer along
with me into the sewer, no; I never thought I’d want it. You can’t go
in every day, the tides don’t answer, and they’re so pertikler now,
far more pertikler than formerly; if you was known to touch the traps,
you’d git hauled up afore the beak. It’s done for all that, and though
there _is_ so many eyes about. The “Johnnys” on the water are always
on the look out, and if they sees any on us about, we has to cut our
lucky. We shore workers sometimes does very well other ways. When we
hears of a fire anywheres, we goes and watches where they shoots the
rubbish, and then we goes and sifts it over, and washes it afterwards,
then all the metal sinks to the bottom. The way we does it is this
here: we takes a barrel cut in half, and fills it with water, and then
we shovels in the siftings, and stirs ’em round and round and round
with a stick; then we throws out that water and puts in some fresh, and
stirs that there round ag’in; arter some time the water gets clear,
and every thing heavy’s fell to the bottom, and then we sees what it
is and picks it out. I’ve made from a pound to thirty shilling a day,
at that there work on lead alone. The time the Parliament Houses was
burnt, the rubbish was shot in Hyde Park, and Long J---- and I goes
to work it, and while we were at it, we didn’t make less nor three
pounds apiece a day; we found sovereigns and half sovereigns, and lots
of silver half melted away, and jewellery, such as rings, and stones,
and brooches; but we never got half paid for them. I found two sets
of bracelets for a lady’s arms, and took ’em to a jeweller, and he
tried them jist where the “great” heat had melted the catch away, and
found they was only metal double plated, or else he said as how he’d
give us thirty pounds for them; howsomever, we takes them down to a
Jew in Petticoat-lane, who used to buy things of us, and he gives us
7_l._ 10_s._ for ’em. We found so many things, that at last Long J----
and I got to quarrel about the “whacking;” there was cheatin’ a goin’
on; it wasn’t all fair and above board as it ought to be, so we gits
to fightin’, and kicks up sich a jolly row, that they wouldn’t let us
work no more, and takes and buries the whole on the rubbish. There’s
plenty o’ things under the ground along with it now, if anybody could
git at them. There was jist two loads o’ rubbish shot at one time in
Bishop Bonner’s-fields, which I worked by myself, and what do you think
I made out of that there?--why I made 3_l._ 5_s._ The rubbish was got
out of a cellar, what hadn’t been stirred for fifty year or more, so I
thinks there ought to be somethink in it, and I keeps my eye on it, and
watches where it’s shot; then I turns to work, and the first thing I
gits hold on is a chain, which I takes to be copper; it was so dirty,
but it turned out to be all solid goold, and I gets 1_l._ 5_s._ for it
from the Jew; arter that I finds lots o’ coppers, and silver money, and
many things besides. _The reason I likes this sort of life is, ’cause
I can sit down when I likes, and nobody can’t order me about. When I’m
hard up, I knows as how I must work, and then I goes at it like sticks
a breaking_; and tho’ the times isn’t as they was, I can go now and
pick up my four or five bob a day, where another wouldn’t know how to
get a brass farden.”

There is a strange tale in existence among the shore-workers, of
a race of wild hogs inhabiting the sewers in the neighbourhood of
Hampstead. The story runs, that a sow in young, by some accident got
down the sewer through an opening, and, wandering away from the spot,
littered and reared her offspring in the drain, feeding on the offal
and garbage washed into it continually. Here, it is alleged, the breed
multiplied exceedingly, and have become almost as ferocious as they
are numerous. This story, apocryphal as it seems, has nevertheless
its believers, and it is ingeniously argued, that the reason why none
of the subterranean animals have been able to make their way to the
light of day is, that they could only do so by reaching the mouth of
the sewer at the river-side, while, in order to arrive at that point,
they must necessarily encounter the Fleet ditch, which runs towards the
river with great rapidity, and as it is the obstinate nature of a pig
to swim _against_ the stream, the wild hogs of the sewers invariably
work their way back to their original quarters, and are thus never to
be seen. What seems strange in the matter is, that the inhabitants
of Hampstead never have been known to see any of these animals pass
beneath the gratings, nor to have been disturbed by their gruntings.
The reader of course can believe as much of the story as he pleases,
and it is right to inform him that the sewer-hunters themselves have
never yet encountered any of the fabulous monsters of the Hampstead
sewers.


OF THE MUD-LARKS.

There is another class who may be termed river-finders, although their
occupation is connected only with the shore; they are commonly known by
the name of “mud-larks,” from being compelled, in order to obtain the
articles they seek, to wade sometimes up to their middle through the
mud left on the shore by the retiring tide. These poor creatures are
certainly about the most deplorable in their appearance of any I have
met with in the course of my inquiries. They may be seen of all ages,
from mere childhood to positive decrepitude, crawling among the barges
at the various wharfs along the river; it cannot be said that they
are clad in rags, for they are scarcely half covered by the tattered
indescribable things that serve them for clothing; their bodies are
grimed with the foul soil of the river, and their torn garments
stiffened up like boards with dirt of every possible description.

Among the mud-larks may be seen many old women, and it is indeed
pitiable to behold them, especially during the winter, bent nearly
double with age and infirmity, paddling and groping among the wet mud
for small pieces of coal, chips of wood, or any sort of refuse washed
up by the tide. These women always have with them an old basket or
an old tin kettle, in which they put whatever they chance to find.
It usually takes them a whole tide to fill this receptacle, but when
filled, it is as much as the feeble old creatures are able to carry
home.

[Illustration: THE MUD-LARK.

[_From a Daguerreotype by_ BEARD.]]

The mud-larks generally live in some court or alley in the
neighbourhood of the river, and, as the tide recedes, crowds of
boys and little girls, some old men, and many old women, may be
observed loitering about the various stairs, watching eagerly for the
opportunity to commence their labours. When the tide is sufficiently
low they scatter themselves along the shore, separating from each
other, and soon disappear among the craft lying about in every
direction. This is the case on both sides of the river, as high up as
there is anything to be found, extending as far as Vauxhall-bridge,
and as low down as Woolwich. The mud-larks themselves, however, know
only those who reside near them, and whom they are accustomed to meet
in their daily pursuits; indeed, with but few exceptions, these people
are dull, and apparently stupid; this is observable particularly among
the boys and girls, who, when engaged in searching the mud, hold but
little converse one with another. The men and women may be passed and
repassed, but they notice no one; they never speak, but with a stolid
look of wretchedness they plash their way through the mire, their
bodies bent down while they peer anxiously about, and occasionally
stoop to pick up some paltry treasure that falls in their way.

The mud-larks collect whatever they happen to find, such as coals,
bits of old-iron, rope, bones, and copper nails that drop from ships
while lying or repairing along shore. Copper nails are the most
valuable of all the articles they find, but these they seldom obtain,
as they are always driven from the neighbourhood of a ship while being
new-sheathed. Sometimes the younger and bolder mud-larks venture on
sweeping some empty coal-barge, and one little fellow with whom I
spoke, having been lately caught in the act of so doing, had to undergo
for the offence seven days’ imprisonment in the House of Correction:
this, he says, he liked much better than mud-larking, for while he
staid there he wore a coat and shoes and stockings, and though he had
not over much to eat, he certainly was never afraid of going to bed
without anything at all--as he often had to do when at liberty. He
thought he would try it on again in the winter, he told me, saying, it
would be so comfortable to have clothes and shoes and stockings then,
and not be obliged to go into the cold wet mud of a morning.

The coals that the mud-larks find, they sell to the poor people of the
neighbourhood at 1_d._ per pot, holding about 14 lbs. The iron and
bones and rope and copper nails which they collect, they sell at the
rag-shops. They dispose of the iron at 5 lbs. for 1_d._, the bones at
3 lbs. a 1_d._, rope a 1/2_d._ per lb. wet, and 3/4_d._ per lb. dry,
and copper nails at the rate of 4_d._ per lb. They occasionally pick up
tools, such as saws and hammers; these they dispose of to the seamen
for biscuit and meat, and sometimes sell them at the rag-shops for a
few halfpence. In this manner they earn from 2-1/2_d._ to 8_d._ per
day, but rarely the latter sum; their average gains may be estimated
at about 3_d._ per day. The boys, after leaving the river, sometimes
scrape their trousers, and frequent the cab-stands, and try to earn a
trifle by opening the cab-doors for those who enter them, or by holding
gentlemen’s horses. Some of them go, in the evening, to a ragged
school, in the neighbourhood of which they live; more, as they say,
because other boys go there, than from any desire to learn.

At one of the stairs in the neighbourhood of the pool, I collected
about a dozen of these unfortunate children; there was not one of
them over twelve years of age, and many of them were but six. It
would be almost impossible to describe the wretched group, so motley
was their appearance, so extraordinary their dress, and so stolid and
inexpressive their countenances. Some carried baskets, filled with the
produce of their morning’s work, and others old tin kettles with iron
handles. Some, for want of these articles, had old hats filled with
the bones and coals they had picked up; and others, more needy still,
had actually taken the caps from their own heads, and filled them with
what they had happened to find. The muddy slush was dripping from their
clothes and utensils, and forming a puddle in which they stood. There
did not appear to be among the whole group as many filthy cotton rags
to their backs as, when stitched together, would have been sufficient
to form the material of one shirt. There were the remnants of one or
two jackets among them, but so begrimed and tattered that it would
have been difficult to have determined either the original material
or make of the garment. On questioning one, he said his father was
a coal-backer; he had been dead eight years; the boy was nine years
old. His mother was alive; she went out charing and washing when she
could get any such work to do. She had 1_s._ a day when she could get
employment, but that was not often; he remembered once to have had
a pair of shoes, but it was a long time since. “It is very cold in
winter,” he said, “to stand in the mud without shoes,” but he did not
mind it in summer. He had been three years mud-larking, and supposed he
should remain a mud-lark all his life. What else could he be? for there
was nothing else that he knew _how_ to do. Some days he earned 1_d._,
and some days 4_d._; he never earned 8_d._ in one day, that would have
been a “jolly lot of money.” He never found a saw or a hammer, he
“only wished” he could, they would be glad to get hold of them at the
dolly’s. He had been one month at school before he went mud-larking.
Some time ago he had gone to the ragged-school; but he no longer went
there, for he forgot it. He could neither read nor write, and did not
think he could learn if he tried “ever so much.” He didn’t know what
religion his father and mother were, nor did know what religion meant.
God was God, he said. He had heard he was good, but didn’t know what
good he was to him. He thought he was a Christian, but he didn’t know
what a Christian was. He had heard of Jesus Christ once, when he went
to a Catholic chapel, but he never heard tell of who or what he was,
and didn’t “particular care” about knowing. His father and mother were
born in Aberdeen, but he didn’t know where Aberdeen was. London was
England, and England, he said, was in London, but he couldn’t tell in
what part. He could not tell where he would go to when he died, and
didn’t believe any one could tell _that_. Prayers, he told me, were
what people said to themselves at night. _He_ never said any, and
didn’t know any; his mother sometimes used to speak to him about them,
but he could never learn any. His mother didn’t go to church or to
chapel, because she had no clothes. All the money he got he gave to
his mother, and she bought bread with it, and when they had no money
they lived the best way they could.

Such was the amount of intelligence manifested by this unfortunate
child.

Another was only seven years old. He stated that his father was a
sailor who had been hurt on board ship, and been unable to go to sea
for the last two years. He had two brothers and a sister, one of them
older than himself; and his elder brother was a mud-lark like himself.
The two had been mud-larking more than a year; they went because they
saw other boys go, and knew that they got money for the things they
found. They were often hungry, and glad to do anything to get something
to eat. Their father was not able to earn anything, and their mother
could get but little to do. They gave all the money they earned to
their mother. They didn’t gamble, and play at pitch and toss when they
had got some money, but some of the big boys did on the Sunday, when
they didn’t go a mud-larking. He couldn’t tell why they did nothing on
a Sunday, “only they didn’t;” though sometimes they looked about to
see where the best place would be on the next day. He didn’t go to the
ragged school; he should like to know how to read a book, though he
couldn’t tell what good it would do him. He didn’t like mud larking,
would be glad of something else, but didn’t know anything else that he
could do.

Another of the boys was the son of a dock labourer,--casually employed.
He was between seven and eight years of age, and his sister, who was
also a mud-lark, formed one of the group. The mother of these two was
dead, and there were three children younger than themselves.

The rest of the histories may easily be imagined, for there was a
painful uniformity in the stories of all the children: they were either
the children of the very poor, who, by their own improvidence or some
overwhelming calamity, had been reduced to the extremity of distress,
or else they were orphans, and compelled from utter destitution to seek
for the means of appeasing their hunger in the mud of the river. That
the majority of this class are ignorant, and without even the rudiments
of education, and that many of them from time to time are committed to
prison for petty thefts, cannot be wondered at. Nor can it even excite
our astonishment that, once within the walls of a prison, and finding
how much more comfortable it is than their previous condition, they
should return to it repeatedly. As for the females growing up under
such circumstances, the worst may be anticipated of them; and in proof
of this I have found, upon inquiry, that very many of the unfortunate
creatures who swell the tide of prostitution in Ratcliff-highway, and
other low neighbourhoods in the East of London, have originally been
mud-larks; and only remained at that occupation till such time as they
were capable of adopting the more easy and more lucrative life of the
prostitute.

As to the numbers and earnings of the mud-larks, the following
calculations fall short of, rather than exceed, the truth. From
Execution Dock to the lower part of Limehouse Hole, there are 14 stairs
or landing-places, by which the mud-larks descend to the shore in order
to pursue their employment. There are about as many on the opposite
side of the water similarly frequented.

At King James’ Stairs, in Wapping Wall, which is nearly a central
position, from 40 to 50 mud-larks go down daily to the river; the
mud-larks “using” the other stairs are not so numerous. If, therefore,
we reckon the number of stairs on both sides of the river at 28,
and the average number of mud-larks frequenting them at 10 each, we
shall have a total of 280. Each mud-lark, it has been shown, earns on
an average 3_d._ a day, or 1_s._ 6_d._ per week; so that the annual
earnings of each will be 3_l._ 18_s._, or say 4_l._, a year, and hence
the gross earnings of the 280 will amount to rather more than 1000_l._
per annum.

But there are, in addition to the mud-larks employed in the
neighbourhood of what may be called the pool, many others who work down
the river at various places as far as Blackwall, on the one side, and
at Deptford, Greenwich, and Woolwich, on the other. These frequent the
neighbourhoods of the various “yards” along shore, where vessels are
being built; and whence, at certain times, chips, small pieces of wood,
bits of iron, and copper nails, are washed out into the river. There
is but little doubt that this portion of the class earn much more than
the mud-larks of the pool, seeing that they are especially convenient
to the places where the iron vessels are constructed; so that the
presumption is, that the number of mud-larks “at work” on the banks
of the Thames (especially if we include those above bridge), and the
value of the property extracted by them from the mud of the river, may
be fairly estimated at double that which is stated above, or say 550
gaining 2000_l._ per annum.

As an illustration of the doctrines I have endeavoured to enforce
throughout this publication, I cite the following history of one of the
above class. It may serve to teach those who are still sceptical as to
the degrading influence of circumstances upon the poor, that many of
the humbler classes, if placed in the same easy position as ourselves,
would become, perhaps, quite as “respectable” members of society.

The lad of whom I speak was discovered by me now nearly two years ago
“mud-larking” on the banks of the river near the docks. He was a quick,
intelligent little fellow, and had been at the business, he told me,
about three years. He had taken to mud-larking, he said, because his
clothes were too bad for him to look for anything better. He worked
every day, with 20 or 30 boys, who might all be seen at daybreak with
their trowsers tucked up, groping about, and picking out the pieces of
coal from the mud on the banks of the Thames. He went into the river
up to his knees, and in searching the mud he often ran pieces of glass
and long nails into his feet. When this was the case, he went home and
dressed the wounds, but returned to the river-side directly, “for
should the tide come up,” he added, “without my having found something,
why I must starve till next low tide.” In the very cold weather he and
his other shoeless companions used to stand in the hot water that ran
down the river side from some of the steam-factories, to warm their
frozen feet.

At first he found it difficult to keep his footing in the mud, and he
had known many beginners fall in. He came to my house, at my request,
the morning after my first meeting with him. It was the depth of
winter, and the poor little fellow was nearly destitute of clothing.
His trousers were worn away up to his knees, he had no shirt, and his
legs and feet (which were bare) were covered with chilblains. On being
questioned by me he gave the following account of his life:--

He was fourteen years old. He had two sisters, one fifteen and the
other twelve years of age. His father had been dead nine years. The man
had been a coal-whipper, and, from getting his work from one of the
publican employers in those days, had become a confirmed drunkard. When
he married he held a situation in a warehouse, where his wife managed
the first year to save 4_l._ 10_s._ out of her husband’s earnings;
but from the day he took to coal-whipping she had never saved one
halfpenny, indeed she and her children were often left to starve. The
man (whilst in a state of intoxication) had fallen between two barges,
and the injuries he received had been so severe that he had lingered in
a helpless state for three years before his death. After her husband’s
decease the poor woman’s neighbours subscribed 1_l._ 5_s._ for her;
with this sum she opened a greengrocer’s shop, and got on very well for
five years.

When the boy was nine years old his mother sent him to the Red Lion
school at Green-bank, near Old Gravel-lane, Ratcliffe-highway; she
paid 1_d._ a week for his learning. He remained there for a year; then
the potato-rot came, and his mother lost upon all she bought. About
the same time two of her customers died 30_s._ in her debt; this loss,
together with the potato-disease, completely ruined her, and the whole
family had been in the greatest poverty from that period. Then she was
obliged to take all her children from their school, that they might
help to keep themselves as best they could. Her eldest girl sold fish
in the streets, and the boy went to the river-side to “pick up” his
living. The change, however, was so great that shortly afterwards the
little fellow lay ill eighteen weeks with the ague. As soon as the boy
recovered his mother and his two sisters were “taken bad” with a fever.
The poor woman went into the “Great House,” and the children were taken
to the Fever Hospital. When the mother returned home she was too weak
to work, and all she had to depend on was what her boy brought from the
river. They had nothing to eat and no money until the little fellow
had been down to the shore and picked up some coals, selling them for
a trifle. “And hard enough he had to work for what he got, poor boy,”
said his mother to me on a future occasion, sobbing; “still he never
complained, but was quite proud when he brought home enough for us to
get a bit of meat with; and when he has sometimes seen me down-hearted,
he has clung round my neck, and assured me that one day God would see
us cared for if I would put my trust in Him.” As soon as his mother was
well enough she sold fruit in the streets, or went out washing when she
could get a day’s work.

The lad suffered much from the pieces of broken glass in the mud. Some
little time before I met with him he had run a copper nail into his
foot. This lamed him for three months, and his mother was obliged to
carry him on her back every morning to the doctor. As soon, however,
as he could “hobble” (to use his mother’s own words) he went back to
the river, and often returned (after many hours’ hard work in the mud)
with only a few pieces of coal, not enough to sell even to get them a
bit of bread. One evening, as he was warming his feet in the water that
ran from a steam factory, he heard some boys talking about the Ragged
School in High-street, Wapping.

“They was saying what they used to learn there,” added the boy. “They
asked me to come along with them for it was great fun. They told me
that all the boys used to be laughing and making game of the master.
They said they used to put out the gas and chuck the slates all about.
They told me, too, that there was a good fire there, so I went to have
a warm and see what it was like. When I got there the master was very
kind to me. They used to give us tea-parties, and to keep us quiet they
used to show us the magic lantern. I soon got to like going there, and
went every night for six months. There was about 40 or 50 boys in the
school. The most of them was thieves, and they used to go thieving
the coals out of barges along shore, and cutting the ropes off ships,
and going and selling it at the rag-shops. They used to get 3/4_d._ a
lb. for the rope when dry, and 1/2_d._ when wet. Some used to steal
pudding out of shops and hand it to those outside, and the last boy
it was handed to would go off with it. They used to steal bacon and
bread sometimes as well. About half of the boys at the school was
thieves. Some had work to do at ironmongers, lead-factories, engineers,
soap-boilers, and so on, and some had no work to do and was good boys
still. After we came out of school at nine o’clock at night, some of
the bad boys would go a thieving, perhaps half-a-dozen and from that
to eight would go out in a gang together. There was one big boy of the
name of C----; he was 18 years old, and is in prison now for stealing
bacon; I think he is in the House of Correction. This C---- used to go
out of school before any of us, and wait outside the door as the other
boys came out. Then he would call the boys he wanted for his gangs on
one side, and tell them where to go and steal. He used to look out in
the daytime for shops where things could be ‘prigged,’ and at night he
would tell the boys to go to them. He was called the captain of the
gangs. He had about three gangs altogether with him, and there were
from six to eight boys in each gang. The boys used to bring what they
stole to C----, and he used to share it with them. I belonged to one of
the gangs. There were six boys altogether in my gang; the biggest lad,
that knowed all about the thieving, was the captain of the gang I was
in, and C---- was captain over him and over all of us.

“There was two brothers of them; you seed them, sir, the night you
first met me. The other boys, as was in my gang, was B---- B----, and
B---- L----, and W---- B----, and a boy we used to call ‘Tim;’ these,
with myself, used to make up one of the gangs, and we all of us used
to go a thieving every night after school-hours. When the tide would
be right up, and we had nothing to do along shore, we used to go
thieving in the daytime as well. It was B---- B----, and B---- L----,
as first put me up to go thieving; they took me with them, one night,
up the lane [New Gravel-lane], and I see them take some bread out of a
baker’s, and they wasn’t found out; and, after that, I used to go with
them regular. Then I joined C----’s gang; and, after that, C---- came
and told us that his gang could do better than ourn, and he asked us
to join our gang to his’n, and we did so. Sometimes we used to make
3_s._ or 4_s._ a day; or about 6_d._ apiece. While waiting outside the
school-doors, before they opened, we used to plan up where we would go
thieving after school was over. I was taken up once for thieving coals
myself, but I was let go again.”

I was so much struck with the boy’s truthfulness of manner, that I
asked him, _would_, he really lead a different life, if he saw a
means of so doing? He assured me he would, and begged me earnestly to
try him. Upon his leaving me, 2_s._ were given him for his trouble.
This small sum (I afterwards learned) kept the family for more than a
fortnight. The girl laid it out in sprats (it being then winter-time);
these she sold in the streets.

I mentioned the fact to a literary friend, who interested himself
in the boy’s welfare; and eventually succeeded in procuring him a
situation at an eminent printer’s. The subjoined letter will show how
the lad conducted himself while there.

  “Whitefriars, April 22, 1850.

 “Messrs. Bradbury and Evans beg to say that the boy J. C. has
 conducted himself in a very satisfactory manner since he has been in
 their employment.”

The same literary friend took the girl into his service. She is in a
situation still, though not in the same family.

The boy now holds a good situation at one of the daily newspaper
offices. So well has he behaved himself, that, a few weeks since, his
wages were increased from 6_s._ to 9_s._ per week. His mother (owing to
the boy’s exertions) has now a little shop, and is doing well.

This simple story requires no comments, and is narrated here in the
hope that it may teach many to know how often the poor boys reared
in the gutter are thieves, merely because society forbids them being
honest lads.


OF THE LONDON DUSTMEN, NIGHTMEN, SWEEPS, AND SCAVENGERS.

These men constitute a large body, and are a class who, all things
considered, do their work silently and efficiently. Almost without the
cognisance of the mass of the people, the refuse is removed from our
streets and houses; and London, as if in the care of a tidy housewife,
is _always_ being cleaned. Great as are the faults and absurdities
of many parts of our system of public cleansing, nevertheless, when
compared with the state of things in any continental capital, the
superiority of the metropolis of Great Britain is indisputable.

In all this matter there is little merit to be attributed to the
workmen, except that they may be well drilled; for the majority of them
are as much machines, apart from their animation, as are the cane and
whalebone made to cleanse the chimney, or the clumsy-looking machine
which, in its progress, is a vehicular scavenger, sweeping as it goes.

These public cleansers are to be thus classified:--

1. Dustmen, or those who empty and remove the collection of ashes,
bones, vegetables, &c., deposited in the dust-bins, or other refuse
receptacles throughout the metropolis.

2. Nightmen, or those who remove the contents of the cesspools.

3. Sweeps, or those who remove the soot from the chimneys.

4. Scavengers, or those who remove the dirt from the streets, roads,
and markets.

Let me, however, before proceeding further with the subject, lay
before the reader the following important return as to the extent and
contents of this prodigious city: for this document I am indebted to
the Commissioners of Police, gentlemen from whom I have derived the
most valuable information since the commencement of my inquiries, and
to whose courtesy and consideration I am anxious to acknowledge my many
obligations.

RETURN SHOWING THE EXTENT, POPULATION, AND POLICE FORCE IN THE
METROPOLITAN POLICE DISTRICT AND THE CITY OF LONDON IN SEPTEMBER, 1850.

  -----------------------------------------+---------------------------------------+------------+-------------
                                           |    Metropolitan Police District[6].   |            |
                                           +------------+-----------+--------------+  City of   |   Grand
                                           |   Inner    |   Outer   |              | London[8]. |   Total.
                                           |District[7].| District. |    Total.    |            |
  -----------------------------------------+------------+-----------+--------------+------------+-------------
  Area (in square miles)                   |         91 |    609-1/2|      700-1/2 |      1-3/4 |      702-1/4
  Parishes                                 |         82 |    136    |      218     |     97     |      315
  Streets, Roads, &c. (length of, in miles)|      1,700 |  1,936    |    3,636     |     50     |    3,686
  Number of Houses inhabited               |    289,912 | 59,995    |  349,907     | 15,613     |  365,520
    „         „    uninhabited             |     11,868 |  1,437    |   13,305     |    387     |   13,692
    „         „    being built             |      4,634 |  1,097    |    5,731     |     23     |    5,754
  Population                               |  1,986,629 |350,331    |2,336,960     |125,000     |2,461,960
  Police Force                             |      4,844 |    660    |    5,504     |    568     |    6,072
  -----------------------------------------+------------+-----------+--------------+------------+----------

_18th September, 1850._

The total here given can hardly be considered as the dimensions of the
metropolis; though, where the capital begins and ends, it is difficult
to say. If, however, London be regarded as concentring within the
Inner Police District, then, adding the extent and contents of that
district to those of the City, as above detailed, we have the subjoined
statement as to the dimensions and inhabitants of the


_Metropolis Proper._

  Area                             92-3/4 square miles.
  Parishes                            179
  Length of street, roads, &c.       1750 miles.
  Number of inhabited houses      305,525
  Ditto uninhabited                12,255
  Ditto being built                  4657
  Population                    2,111,629
  Police force                       5412

But if the extent of even this “inner district” be so vast as almost
to overpower the mind with its magnitude--if its population be greater
than that of the entire kingdom of Hanover, and almost equal to that of
the republic of Switzerland--if its houses be so numerous that placed
side by side they would form one continuous line of dwellings from its
centre to Moscow--if its streets and roads be nearly equal in length to
one quarter of the diameter of the earth itself,--what a task must the
cleansing of such a bricken wilderness be, and yet, assuredly, though
it be by far the greatest, it is at the same time by far the cleanest
city in the world.

The removal of the refuse of a large town is, perhaps, one of the
most important of social operations. Not only is it necessary for the
well-being of a vast aggregation of people that the ordure should be
removed from both within and around their dwellings as soon as it is
generated, but nature, ever working in a circle and reproducing in the
same ratio as she destroys, has made this same ordure not only the
cause of present disease when allowed to remain within the city, but
the means of future health and sustenance when removed to the fields.

In a leading article in the _Morning Chronicle_, written about two
years since, I said--

“That man gets his bones from the rocks and his muscles from the
atmosphere, is beyond all doubt. The iron in his blood and the lime in
his teeth were originally in the soil. But these could not be in his
body unless they had previously formed part of his food. And yet we can
neither live on air nor on stones. We cannot grow fat upon lime, and
iron is positively indigestible in our stomachs. It is by means of the
vegetable creation alone that we are enabled to convert the mineral
into flesh and blood. The only apparent use of herbs and plants is to
change the inorganic earth, air, and water, into organic substances
fitted for the nutrition of animals. The little lichen, which, by means
of the oxalic acid that it secretes, decomposes the rocks to which it
clings, and fits their lime for ‘assimilation’ with higher organisms,
is, as it were, but the primitive bone-maker of the world. By what
subtle transmutation inorganic nature is changed into organic, and dead
inert matter quickened with life, is far beyond us even to conjecture.
Suffice it that an express apparatus is required for the process--a
special mechanism to convert the ‘_crust_ of the earth,’ as it is
called, into food for man and beast.

“Now, in Nature everything moves in a circle--perpetually changing,
and yet ever returning to the point whence it started. Our bodies are
continually decomposing and recomposing--indeed, the very process of
breathing is but one of decomposition. As animals live on vegetables,
even so is the refuse of the animal the vegetable’s food. The carbonic
acid which comes from our lungs, and which is poison for us to inhale,
is not only the vital air of plants, but positively their nutriment.
With the same wondrous economy that marks all creation, it has been
ordained that what is unfitted for the support of the superior
organisms, is of all substances the best adapted to give strength and
vigour to the inferior. That which we excrete as pollution to our
system, they secrete as nourishment to theirs. Plants are not only
Nature’s scavengers but Nature’s purifiers. They remove the filth
from the earth, as well as disinfect the atmosphere, and fit it to be
breathed by a higher order of beings. Without the vegetable creation
the animal could neither have been nor be. Plants not only fitted the
earth originally for the residence of man and the brute, but to this
day they continue to render it habitable to us. For this end their
nature has been made the very antithesis to ours. The process by which
we live is the process by which they are destroyed. That which supports
respiration in us produces putrefaction in them. What our lungs throw
off, their lungs absorb--what our bodies reject, their roots imbibe.

“Hence, in order that the balance of waste and supply should be
maintained--that the principle of universal compensation should be kept
up, and that what is rejected by us should go to the sustenance of
plants, Nature has given us several instinctive motives to remove our
refuse from us. She has not only constituted that which we egest the
most loathsome of all things to our senses and imagination, but she has
rendered its effluvium highly pernicious to our health--sulphuretted
hydrogen being at once the most deleterious and offensive of all gases.
Consequently, as in all other cases where the great law of Nature has
to be enforced by special sanctions, a double motive has been given us
to do that which it is necessary for us to do, and thus it has been
made not only advantageous to us to remove our refuse to the fields,
but positively detrimental to our health, and disgusting to our senses,
to keep it in the neighbourhood of our houses.

“In every well-regulated State, therefore, an effective and rapid
means for carrying off the ordure of the people to a locality where
it may be fruitful instead of destructive, becomes a most important
consideration. Both the health and the wealth of the nation depend upon
it. If to make two blades of wheat grow where one grew before is to
confer a benefit on the world, surely to remove that which will enable
us at once to do this, and to purify the very air which we breathe,
as well as the water which we drink, must be a still greater boon
to society. It is, in fact, to give the community not only a double
amount of food, but a double amount of health to enjoy it. We are now
beginning to understand this. Up to the present time we have only
thought of removing our refuse--the idea of using it never entered our
minds. It was not until science taught us the dependence of one order
of creation upon another, that we began to see that what appeared worse
than worthless to us was Nature’s capital--_wealth set aside for future
production_.”

In connection with this part of the subject, viz., the use of human
refuse, I would here draw attention to those erroneous notions, as
to the multiplication of the people, which teach us to look upon the
increase of the population beyond certain limits as the greatest
possible evil that can befall a community. Population, it is said,
multiplies itself in a geometrical ratio, whereas the produce of the
land is increased only in arithmetical proportion; that is to say,
while the people are augmented after the rate of--

  2  4  8  16  32  64

the quantity of food for them can be extended only in the following
degrees:--

  2  4  6  8  10  12

The cause of this is said to be that, after a certain stage in the
cultivation of the soil, the increase of the produce from land is not
in proportion to the increase of labour devoted to it; that is to say,
doubling the labour does not double the crop; and hence it is asserted
that the human race increasing at a quicker rate than the food,
insufficient sustenance must be the necessary lot of a portion of the
people in every densely-populated community.

That men of intelligence and education should have been persuaded by
so plausible a doctrine at the time of its first promulgation may be
readily conceived, for then the notions concerning organic chemistry
were vague in the extreme, and the great universal law of Waste
and Supply remained to be fully developed; but that men pretending
to the least scientific knowledge should in these days be found
advocating the Population Theory is only another of the many proofs
of the indisposition of even the strongest minds to abandon their pet
prejudices. Assuredly Malthus and Liebig are incompatible. If the new
notions as to the chemistry of vegetation be true, then must the old
notions as to population be utterly unfounded. If what we excrete
plants secrete--if what we exhale they inspire--if our refuse is their
food--then it follows that to increase the population is to increase
the quantity of manure, while to increase the manure is to augment
the food of plants, and consequently the plants themselves. If the
plants nourish us, we at least nourish them. It seems never to have
occurred to the economists that plants themselves required sustenance,
and consequently they never troubled themselves to inquire whence they
derived the elements of their growth. Had they done this they would
never have even expected that a double quantity of mere labour upon the
soil should have doubled the produce; but they would rather have seen
that it was utterly impossible for the produce to be doubled without
the food in the soil being doubled likewise; that is to say, they would
have perceived that plants could not, whatever the labour exerted upon
their cultivation, extract the elements of their organization from the
earth and air, unless those elements previously existed in the land and
atmosphere in which they grew, and that such elements, moreover, could
not exist there without some organic being to egest them.

This doctrine of the universal Compensation extending throughout the
material world, and more especially through the animal and vegetable
kingdom, is, perhaps, one of the grandest and most consoling that
science has yet revealed to us, making each mutually dependent on the
other, and so contributing each to the other’s support. Moreover it is
the more comforting, as enabling us almost to demonstrate the falsity
of a creed which is opposed to every generous impulse of our nature,
and which is utterly irreconcilable with the attributes of the Creator.

“Thanks to organic chemistry,” I said two years ago in the _Morning
Chronicle_, “we are beginning to wake up. Science has taught us that
the removal of the ordure of towns to the fields is a question that
concerns not only our health, but, what is a far more important
consideration with us, our breeches pockets. What we, in our ignorance,
had mistaken for refuse of the vilest kind, we have now learned to
regard as being, with reference to its fertilizing virtues, ‘a precious
ore, running in rich veins beneath the surface of our streets.’
Whereas, if allowed to reek and seethe in cesspools within scent of
our very hearths, or to pollute the water that we use to quench our
thirst and cook our food, it becomes, like all wealth badly applied,
converted into ‘poison:’ as Romeo says of gold to the apothecary--

    ‘Doing more murders in this loathsome world
    Than those poor compounds which thou mayst not sell.’

“Formerly, in our eagerness to get rid of the pollution, we had
literally not looked beyond our noses: hence our only care was to carry
off the nuisance from the immediate vicinity of our own residences.
It was no matter to us what became of it, so long as it did not taint
the atmosphere around us. This the very instincts of our nature had
made objectionable to us; so we laid down just as many drains and
sewers as would carry our night-soil to the nearest stream; and thus,
instead of poisoning the air that we breathed, we poisoned the water
that we drank. Then, as the town extended--for cities, like mosaic
work, are put together piecemeal--street being dovetailed to street,
like county to county in our children’s geographical puzzles--each new
row of houses tailed on its drains to those of its neighbours, without
any inquiry being made as to whether they were on the same level or
not. The consequence of this is, that the sewers in many parts of our
metropolis are subject to an ebb and flood like their central stream,
so that the pollution which they remove at low-water, they regularly
bring back at high-water to the very doors of the houses whence they
carried it.

“According to the average of the returns, from 1841 to 1846, we
are paying two millions every year for guano, bone-dust, and other
foreign fertilizers of our soil. In 1845, we employed no fewer than
683 ships to bring home 220,000 tons of animal manure from Ichaboe
alone; and yet we are every day emptying into the Thames 115,000 tons
of a substance which has been proved to be possessed of even greater
fertilizing powers. With 200 tons of the sewage that we are wont to
regard as refuse, applied to the irrigation of one acre of meadow
land, seven crops, we are told, have been produced in the year, each
of them worth from 6_l._ to 7_l._; so that, considering the produce to
have been doubled by these means, we have an increase of upwards of
20_l._ per acre per annum effected by the application of that refuse
to the surface of our fields. This return is at the rate of 10_l._
for every 100 tons of sewage; and, since the total amount of refuse
discharged into the Thames from the sewers of the metropolis is, in
round numbers, 40,000,000 tons per annum, it follows that, according to
such estimate, we are positively wasting 4,000,000_l._ of money every
year; or, rather, _it costs us that amount to poison the waters about
us_. Or, granting that the fertilizing power of the metropolitan refuse
is--as it is said to be--as great for arable as for pasture-lands,
then for every 200 tons of manure that we now cast away, we might have
an increase of at least 20 bushels of corn per acre. Consequently
the entire 40,000,000 tons of sewage, if applied to fatten the land
instead of to poison the water, would, at such a rate of increase,
swell our produce to the extent of 4,000,000 bushels of wheat per
annum. Calculating then that each of these bushels would yield 16
quartern loaves, it would follow that we fling into the Thames no less
than 246,000,000 lbs. of bread every year; or, still worse, by pouring
into the river that which, if spread upon our fields, would enable
thousands to live, we convert the elements of life and health into the
germs of disease and death, changing into slow but certain poisons that
which, in the subtle transmutation of organic nature, would become
acres of life-sustaining grain.” I shall have more to say subsequently
on this waste and its consequences.

These considerations show how vastly important it is that in the best
of all possible ways we should _collect_, _remove_, and _use_ the
scavengery and excrementitious matter of our streets and houses.

Now the removal of the refuse of London is no slight task, consisting,
as it does, of the cleansing of 1750 miles of streets and roads; of
collecting the dust from 300,000 dust-bins; of emptying (according to
the returns of the Board of Health) the same number of cesspools, and
sweeping near upon 3,000,000 chimneys.

A task so vast it might naturally be imagined would give employment to
a number of hands, and yet, if we trusted the returns of the Occupation
Abstract of 1841, the whole of these stupendous operations are
performed by a limited number of individuals.


RETURN OF THE NUMBER OF SWEEPS, DUSTMEN, AND NIGHTMEN IN THE
METROPOLIS, ACCORDING TO THE CENSUS OF 1841.

  ------------------------+------+----------------------+----------------------
                          |      |        Males.        |       Females.
                          |      +------------+---------+------------+---------
                          |Total.|20 years and|         |20 years and|
                          |      |  upwards.  |Under 20.|  upwards.  |Under 20.
  ------------------------+------+------------+---------+------------+---------
  Chimney Sweepers        | 1033 |     619    |   370   |     44     |
  Scavengers and Nightmen |  254 |     227    |    10   |     17     |
  ------------------------+------+------------+---------+------------+---------

I am informed by persons in the trade that the “females” here
mentioned as chimney-sweepers, and scavengers, and nightmen, must be
such widows or daughters of sweeps and nightmen as have succeeded to
their businesses, for that no women _work_ at such trades; excepting,
perhaps, in the management and care of the soot, in assisting to empty
and fill the bags. Many females, however, are employed in sifting dust,
but the calling of the dustman and dustwoman is not so much as noticed
in the population returns.

According to the occupation abstract of the previous decennial period,
the number of males of 20 years and upwards (for none others were
mentioned) pursuing the same callings in the metropolis in 1831, were
as follows:--

  Soot and chimney-sweepers   421
  Nightmen and scavengers     130

Hence the increase in the adult male operatives belonging to these
trades, between 1831 and 1841, was, for Chimney-sweeps, 198; and
Scavengers and Nightmen, 97.

But these returns are preposterously incorrect. In the first place
it was not until 1842 that the parliamentary enactment prohibiting
the further employment of climbing-boys for the purpose of sweeping
chimneys came into operation. At that time the number of inhabited
houses in the metropolis was in round numbers 250,000, and calculating
these to have contained only eight rooms each, there would have been at
the least 2,000,000 chimneys to sweep. Now, according to the government
returns above cited--the London climbing-boys (for the masters did not
and could not climb) in 1841 numbered only 370; at which rate there
would have been but one boy to no less than 5400 chimneys! Pursuing
the same mode of testing the validity of the “official” statements, we
find, as the nightmen generally work in gangs of four, that each of
the 63, or say 64, gangs comprised in the census returns, would have
had 4000 cesspools to empty of their contents; while, working both
as scavengers and nightmen (for, according to the census, they were
the _only_ individuals following those occupations in London), they
would after their nocturnal labours have had about 27 miles of streets
and roads to cleanse--a feat which would certainly have thrown the
scavengering prowess of Hercules into the shade.

Under the respective heads of the dustmen, nightmen, sweeps, and
scavengers, I shall give an account of the numbers, &c., employed, and
a resumé of the whole. It will be sufficient here to mention that my
investigations lead to the conclusion that, of men working as dustmen
(a portion of whom are employed as nightmen and scavengers) there are
at present about 1800 in the metropolis. The census of 1841, as I have
pointed out, mentions no dustman whatever!

But I have so often had instances of the defects of this national
numbering of the people that I have long since ceased to place much
faith in its returns connected with the humbler grades of labour. The
costermongers, for example, I estimate at about 10,000, whereas the
government reports, as has been before mentioned, ignore the very
existence of such a class of people, and make the entire hawkers,
hucksters, and pedlars of the metropolis to amount to no more than
2045. Again, the London “coal labourers, heavers, and porters” are
said, in the census of 1841, to be only 1700 in number; I find,
however, that there are no less than 1800 “registered” coal-whippers,
and as many coal porters; so that I am in no way inclined to give great
credence to the “official enumerations.” The difficulties which beset
the perfection of such a document are almost insuperable, and I have
already heard of returns for the forthcoming document, made by ignorant
people as to their occupations, which already go far to nullify the
facts in connection with the employment of the ignorant and profligate
classes of the metropolis.

Before quitting this part of the subject, viz., the extent of surface,
the length of streets, and the number of houses throughout the
metropolis requiring to be continually cleansed of their refuse, as
well as the number of people as continually engaged in so cleansing
them, let me here append the last returns of the Registrar General,
copied from the census of 1851, as to the dimensions and contents of
the metropolis according to that functionary, so that they may be
compared with those of the metropolitan police before given.

In Weale’s “_London Exhibited_,” which is by far the most comprehensive
description of the metropolis that I have seen, it is stated that it
is “only possible to adopt a general idea of the giant city,” as its
precise boundaries and extent cannot be defined. On the north of the
Thames, we are told, London extends to Edmonton and Finchley; on the
west it stretches to Acton and Hammersmith; on the east it reaches
Leyton and Ham; while on the south of the Thames the metropolis is said
to embrace Wandsworth, Streatham, Lewisham, Woolwich, and Plumstead.
“To each of these points,” says Mr. Weale, but upon what authority he
does not inform us, “continuous streets of houses reach; but the solid
mass of houses lies within narrow bounds--with these several long
arms extending from it. The greatest length of street, from east to
west,” he adds, “is about fourteen miles, and from north to south about
thirteen miles. The solid mass is about seven miles by four miles, so
that the ground covered with houses is not less than 20 square miles.”

Mr. McCulloch, in his “_London in 1850-51_,” has a passage to the
same effect. He says, “The continued and rapid increase of buildings
renders it difficult to ascertain the extent of the metropolis at any
particular period. If we include in it those parts only that present
a solid mass of houses, its length from east to west may be taken at
six miles, and its breadth from north to south at about three miles
and a half. There is, however, a nearly continuous line of houses
from Blackwall to Chelsea, a distance of about seven miles, and from
Walworth to Holloway, of four and a half miles. The extent of surface
covered by buildings is estimated at about sixteen square miles, or
above 10,000 acres, so that M. Say, the celebrated French economist,
did not really indulge in hyperbole when he said, ‘_Londres n’est plus
une ville: c’est une province couverte de maisons!_’ (London is no
longer a town: it is a province covered with houses).”

The Government authorities, however, appear to have very different
notions from either of the above gentlemen as to the extent of the
metropolis.

The limits of London, as at present laid down by the Registrar General,
include 176 parishes, besides several precincts, liberties, and
extra-parochial places, comprising altogether about 115 square miles.
According to the old bills of mortality, London formerly included only
148 parishes, which were located as follows:--

  Parishes within the walls of the city                97
  Parishes without the walls                           17
  Parishes in the city and liberties of Westminster    10
  Out parishes in Middlesex and Surrey                 24
                                                      ---
                                                      148

The parishes which have been annexed to the above at different periods
since the commencement of the present century are:--

  Parishes added by the late Mr. Rickman
    (see Pop. Abstracts, 1801-31) (including
    Chelsea, Kensington, Paddington, St.
    Marylebone, and St. Pancras)                   5

  Parishes added by the Registrar General,
    1838 (including Hammersmith, Fulham,
    Stoke Newington, Stratford-le-Bow, Bromley,
    Camberwell, Deptford, Greenwich, and
    Woolwich)                                     10

  Parishes added by the Registrar General
    in 1844 (including Clapham, Battersea,
    Wandsworth, Putney, Lower Tooting, and
    Streatham)                                     6

  Parishes added by the Registrar General in
    1846 (comprising Hampstead, Charlton,
    Plumstead, Eltham, Lee, Kidbroke, and
    Lewisham)                                      7
                                                 ---
  Total number of parishes in the metropolis,
    as defined by the Registrar General          176

The extent of London, according to the limits assigned to it at the
several periods above mentioned, was--

                                Stat. Acres.   Sq. miles.
  London within the old bills
    of mortality, from 1726        21,080          32

  London, within the limits
    adopted by the late Mr.
    Rickman, 1801-31               29,850          46

  London, within the limits
    adopted by the Registrar
    General, 1838-43               44,850          70

  London, within the limits
    adopted by the Registrar
    General, 1844-46               55,650          87

  London, within the limits
    adopted by the Registrar
    General in 1847-51             74,070         115

“London,” observes Mr. Weale, “has now swallowed up many cities, towns,
villages, and separate jurisdictions. The four commonwealths, or
kingdoms, of the Middle Saxons, East Saxons, the South Rick, and the
Kentwaras, once ruled over its surface. It now embraces the episcopal
cities of London and Westminster, the towns of Woolwich, Deptford, and
Wandsworth, the watering places of Hampstead, Highgate, Islington,
Acton, and Kilburn, the fishing town of Barking, the once secluded and
ancient villages of Ham, Hornsey, Sydenham, Lee, Kensington, Fulham,
Lambeth, Clapham, Paddington, Hackney, Chelsea, Stoke Newington,
Newington Butts, Plumstead, and many others.”

The 176 parishes now included by the Registrar General within the
boundaries of the metropolis, are arranged by him into five districts,
of which the areas, population, and number of inhabited houses were on
the 31st of March, 1851, as undermentioned:--


TABLE SHOWING THE AREA, NUMBER OF INHABITED HOUSES, AND POPULATION OF
THE DIFFERENT PARTS OF THE METROPOLIS, 1841-51.

  ------------------------------+--------+-----------------------+-------------------
                                |        |      Population.      | Inhabited Houses.
     DIVISIONS OF METROPOLIS.   |Statute +-----------+-----------+---------+---------
                                | Acres. |   1841.   |   1851.   |  1841.  |  1851.
  ------------------------------+--------+-----------+-----------+---------+---------
          WEST DISTRICTS.       |        |           |           |         |
  Kensington                    |  7,860 |    74,898 |   119,990 |  10,962 |  17,292
  Chelsea                       |    780 |    40,243 |    56,543 |   5,648 |   7,629
  St. George’s, Hanover-square  |  1,090 |    66,657 |    73,207 |   7,630 |   8,795
  Westminster                   |    840 |    56,802 |    65,609 |   6,439 |   6,647
  St. Martin’s-in-the-Fields    |    260 |    25,132 |    24,557 |   2,439 |   2,323
  St. James’s, Westminster      |    165 |    37,457 |    36,426 |   3,590 |   3,460
                                |        |           |           |         |
         NORTH DISTRICTS.       |        |           |           |         |
  Marylebone                    |  1,490 |   138,383 |   157,679 |  14,169 |  15,955
  Hampstead (added 1846)        |  2,070 |    10,109 |    11,986 |   1,411 |   1,719
  Pancras                       |  2,600 |   129,969 |   167,198 |  14,766 |  18,731
  Islington                     |  3,050 |    55,779 |    95,154 |   8,508 |  13,558
  Hackney                       |  3,950 |    42,328 |    58,424 |   7,192 |   9,861
                                |        |           |           |         |
        CENTRAL DISTRICTS.      |        |           |           |         |
  St Giles’s                    |    250 |    54,378 |    54,062 |   4,959 |   4,778
  Strand                        |    163 |    43,667 |    44,446 |   4,327 |   3,938
  Holborn                       |    188 |    44,532 |    46,571 |   4,603 |   4,517
  Clerkenwell                   |    320 |    56,799 |    64,705 |   6,946 |   7,259
  St. Luke’s                    |    240 |    49,908 |    54,058 |   6,385 |   6,421
  East London                   |}[9]230 |    39,718 |    44,407 |   4,796 |   4,785
  West London                   |}       |    29,188 |    28,829 |   3,010 |   2,745
  London, City of               |[10]370 |    56,009 |    55,908 |   7,921 |   7,329
                                |        |           |           |         |
          EAST DISTRICTS.       |        |           |           |         |
  Shoreditch                    |    620 |    83,564 |   109,209 |  12,642 |  15,433
  Bethnal Green                 |    760 |    74,206 |    90,170 |  11,782 |  13,370
  Whitechapel                   |    316 |    71,879 |    79,756 |   8,834 |   8,832
  St George’s in the East       |    230 |    41,416 |    48,375 |   5,985 |   6,151
  Stepney                       |  2,518 |    90,831 |   110,669 |  14,364 |  16,346
  Poplar                        |  1,250 |    31,171 |    47,157 |   5,066 |   6,882
                                |        |           |           |         |
         SOUTH DISTRICTS.       |        |           |           |         |
  St. Saviour’s, Southwark      |    [11]|    33,027 |    35,729 |   4,659 |   4,613
  St. Olave’s, Southwark        |    [11]|    19,869 |    19,367 |   2,523 |   2,365
  Bermondsey                    |    620 |    35,002 |    48,128 |   5,674 |   7,095
  St. George’s, Southwark       |[11]590 |    46,718 |    51,825 |   6,663 |   7,005
  Newington                     |    630 |    54,693 |    64,805 |   9,370 |  10,468
  Lambeth                       |  3,640 |   116,072 |   139,240 |  17,791 |  20,520
  Wandsworth (added 1843)       | 10,800 |    39,918 |    50,770 |   6,459 |   8,290
  Camberwell                    |  4,570 |    39,931 |    54,668 |   6,843 |   9,417
  Rotherhithe                   |    690 |    13,940 |    17,778 |   2,420 |   2,834
  Greenwich                     |  4,570 |    81,125 |    99,404 |  11,995 |  14,423
  Lewisham (added 1846)         | 16,350 |    23,051 |    34,831 |   3,966 |   5,936
  ------------------------------+--------+-----------+-----------+---------+---------
    Total London Division       | 74,070 | 1,948,369 | 2,361,640 | 262,737 | 307,722
  ------------------------------+--------+-----------+-----------+---------+---------

In order to be able to compare the average density of the population
in the various parts of London, I have made a calculation as to the
number of persons and houses to the acre, as well as the number of
inhabitants to each house. I have also computed the annual rate of
increase of the population from 1841-51, in the several localities
here mentioned, and append the result. It will be seen that, while
what are popularly known as the suburbs have increased, both in houses
and population, at a considerable rate, some of the more central parts
of London, on the contrary, have decreased not only in the number of
people, but in the number of dwellings as well. This has been the case
in St. Martin’s-in-the-Fields, St. James’s, Westminster, St. Giles’s,
and the City of London.


TABLE SHOWING THE INCREASE OF THE POPULATION AND INHABITED HOUSES, AS
WELL AS THE NUMBER OF PEOPLE AND HOUSES TO EACH ACRE, AND THE NUMBER
OF PERSONS TO EACH HOUSE IN THE DIFFERENT PARTS OF THE METROPOLIS IN
1841-51.

  --------------------------------+----------------+---------------+---------+---------+---------
                                  |Yearly Increase |Yearly Increase|Number of|Number of|Number of
                                  | of Population  | of Inhabited  |People to|Inhabited| Persons
                                  |per annum, from | Houses, from  |the Acre,|Houses to| to each
                                  |   1841-51.     |    1841-51.   |  1851.  |the Acre,| House,
                                  |                |               |         |  1851.  |  1851.
  --------------------------------+----------------+---------------+---------+---------+---------
            WEST DISTRICTS.       |                |               |         |         |
  Kensington                      |     4,509·2    |       633·0   |   15·2  |    2·2  |   6·9
  Chelsea                         |     1,630·0    |       198·1   |   72·4  |    9·7  |   7·4
  St. George’s,                   |                |               |         |         |
    Hanover-square                |       655·0    |        11·6   |   67·1  |    8·0  |   8·3
  Westminster                     |       880·7    |        20·8   |   80·4  |    8·2  |   9·8
  St. Martin’s-in-the-Fields      |_decr._ 57·5[12]|_decr._11·6[12]|   94·3  |    8·9  |  10·5
  St. James’s, Westminster        |       103·1[12]|       13·0[12]|  220·7  |   20·9  |  10·5
            NORTH DISTRICTS.      |                |               |         |         |
  Marylebone                      |     1,926·6    |       178·6   |  105·8  |   10·3  |   9·8
  Hampstead                       |       187·7    |        30·8   |    5·7  |     ·8  |   6·9
  St. Pancras                     |     3,722·9    |       396·5   |   64·3  |    7·2  |   8·9
  Islington                       |     3,937·5    |       505·0   |   31·5  |    4·4  |   7·0
  Hackney                         |     1,609·6    |       719·2   |   14·7  |    2·3  |   5·9
           CENTRAL DISTRICTS.     |                |               |         |         |
  St. Giles’s                     | _decr._31·6[12]|_decr._18·1[12]|  216·2  |   19·1  |  11·3
  Strand                          |        77·9    |_decr._38·9[12]|  272·2  |   24·1  |  11·2
  Holborn                         |       203·9    |_decr._ 8·6[12]|  247·7  |   24·0  |  10·3
  Clerkenwell                     |       790·6    |        31·3   |  202·2  |   22·6  |   8·9
  St. Luke’s                      |       415·0    |         3·6   |  225·2  |   26·7  |   8·4
  East and West London            |       433·0    |_decr._27·6[12]|  318·4  |   32·7  |   9·7
  London City                     |_decr._ 10·1[12]|_decr._59·2[12]|  151·0  |   19·8  |   7·6
            EAST DISTRICTS.       |                |               |         |         |
  Shoreditch                      |     2,564·5    |       279·1   |  176·1  |   24·8  |   7·0
  Bethnal-green                   |     1,596·4    |       158·8   |  118·6  |   17·5  |   6·7
  Whitechapel                     |       787·7    |_decr._  ·2[12]|  252·3  |   27·9  |   9·0
  St. George’s-in-the-East        |       695·9    |        16·6   |  210·3  |   26·7  |   7·8
  Stepney                         |     1,983·8    |       198·2   |   43·9  |    6·4  |   6·7
  Poplar                          |     1,598·6    |       181·6   |   37·7  |    5·5  |   6·8
            SOUTH DISTRICTS.      |                |               |         |         |
  St. Saviour’s, St. Olave’s, and |                |               |         |         |
    St. George’s, Southwark       |       730·7    |        13·8   |  181·2  |   23·7  |   7·6
  Bermondsey                      |     1,312·6    |       142·1   |   77·6  |   11·2  |   6·7
  Newington                       |     1,011·2    |       109·8   |  102·8  |   16·6  |   6·1
  Lambeth                         |     2,316·8    |       272·9   |   38·2  |    5·6  |   6·7
  Wandsworth                      |     1,085·2    |       183·1   |    4·7  |     ·7  |   6·1
  Camberwell                      |     1,473·7    |       257·4   |   12·4  |    2·0  |   5·8
  Rotherhithe                     |       383·8    |        41·4   |   25·7  |    4·1  |   6·2
  Greenwich                       |     1,827·9    |       242·8   |   21·7  |    3·1  |   6·8
  Lewisham                        |     1,178·0    |       197·0   |    2·1  |     ·3  |   5·6
  --------------------------------+----------------+---------------+---------+---------+---------
  Total for all London            |    41,327·1    |     4,498·5   |   31·8  |    4·1  |   7·6
  --------------------------------+----------------+---------------+---------+---------+---------

By the above table we perceive that St. Martin’s-in-the-Fields, St.
James’s, Westminster, St. Giles’s, the Strand, and the City have all
decreased both in population and houses since 1841. The population has
diminished most of all in St. James’s, and the houses the most in the
City. The suburban districts, however, such as Chelsea, Marylebone,
St. Pancras, Islington, Hackney, Shoreditch, Bethnal-green, Stepney,
Poplar, Bermondsey, Newington, Lambeth, Wandsworth, Camberwell,
Greenwich, and Lewisham, have all increased greatly within the last
ten years, both in dwellings and people. The greatest increase of the
population, as well as houses, has been in Kensington, where the yearly
addition has been 4500 people, and 630 houses.

The more densely-populated districts are, St. James’s, Westminster,
St. Giles’s, the Strand, Holborn, Clerkenwell, St. Luke, Whitechapel,
and St. George’s-in-the-East, in all of which places there are upwards
of 200 people to the acre, while in East and West London, in which
the population is the most dense of all, the number of people exceeds
300 to the acre. The least densely populated districts are Hampstead,
Wandsworth, and Lewisham, where the people are not more than six, and
as few as two to the acre.

The districts in which there are the greatest number of houses to
a given space, are St. James’s, Westminster, the Strand, Holborn,
Clerkenwell, St. Luke’s, Shoreditch, and St. George’s-in-the-East, in
all of which localities there are upwards of 20 dwellings to each acre
of ground, while in East and West London, which is the most closely
built over of all, the number of houses to each acre are as many as 32.
Hampstead and Lewisham appear to be the most open districts; for there
the houses are not more than eight and three to every ten acres of
ground.

The localities in which the houses are the most crowded with inmates
are the Strand and St. Giles’s, where there are more than eleven
people to each house, and St. Martin’s-in-the-Fields, and St. James’s,
Westminster, and Holborn, where each house has on an average ten
inmates, while in Lewisham and Wandsworth the houses are the least
crowded, for there we find only five people to every house.

Now, comparing this return with that of the metropolitan police,
we have the following results as to the extent and contents of the
Metropolis Proper:--

                              According
                                 to            According
                              Registrar     to Metropolitan
                               General.         Police.
  Area (in statute acres)        74,070          58,880
  Parishes                          176             179
  Number of inhabited houses    307,722         305,525
  Population                  2,361,640       2,111,629

Hence it will be seen that both the extent and contents of these two
returns differ most materially.

1st. The superficies of the Registrar General’s metropolis is very
nearly 13 square miles, or 15,190 statute acres, greater than the
metropolis of the police commissioners.

2nd. The number of inhabited houses is 2197 more in the one than in the
other.

3rd. The population of London, according to the Registrar General’s
limits, is 250,011, or a quarter of a million, more than it is
according to the limits of the metropolitan police.

It were much to be desired that some more definite and scientific
mode, not only of limiting, but of dividing the metropolis, were to be
adopted. At present there are, perhaps, as many different metropolises,
so to speak, and as many different modes of apportioning the several
parts of the whole into districts, as there are public bodies whose
operations are specially confined to the capital. The Registrar
General has, as we have seen, one metropolis divided into western,
northern, central, eastern, and southern districts. The metropolitan
police commissioners have another metropolis apportioned into its A
divisions, B divisions, and so forth; and the Post Office has a third
metropolis parcelled out in a totally different manner; while the
London City Mission, the Scripture Readers, the Ragged Schools, and the
many other similar metropolitan institutions, all seem to delight in
creating a distinct metropolis for themselves, thus tending to make the
statistical “confusion worse confounded.”


OF THE DUSTMEN OF LONDON.

Dust and rubbish accumulate in houses from a variety of causes, but
principally from the residuum of fires, the white ash and cinders, or
small fragments of unconsumed coke, giving rise to by far the greater
quantity. Some notion of the vast amount of this refuse annually
produced in London may be formed from the fact that the consumption of
coal in the metropolis is, according to the official returns, 3,500,000
tons per annum, which is at the rate of a little more than 11 tons per
house; the poorer families, it is true, do not burn more than 2 tons
in the course of the year, but then many such families reside in the
same house, and hence the average will appear in no way excessive.
Now the ashes and cinders arising from this enormous consumption of
coal would, it is evident, if allowed to lie scattered about in such a
place as London, render, ere long, not only the back streets, but even
the important thoroughfares, filthy and impassable. Upon the Officers
of the various parishes, therefore, has devolved the duty of seeing
that the refuse of the fuel consumed throughout London is removed
almost as fast as produced; this they do by entering into an agreement
for the clearance of the “dust-bins” of the parishioners as often as
required, with some person who possesses all necessary appliances for
the purpose--such as horses, carts, baskets, and shovels, together with
a plot of waste ground whereon to deposit the refuse. The persons with
whom this agreement is made are called “dust-contractors,” and are
generally men of considerable wealth.

The collection of “dust,” is now, more properly speaking, the removal
of it. The collection of an article implies the voluntary seeking
after it, and this the dustmen can hardly be said to do; for though
they parade the streets shouting for the dust as they go, they do so
rather to fulfil a certain duty they have undertaken to perform than in
any expectation of profit to be derived from the sale of the article.

Formerly the custom was otherwise; but then, as will be seen hereafter,
the residuum of the London fuel was far more valuable. Not many
years ago it was the practice for the various master dustmen to send
in their tenders to the vestry, on a certain day appointed for the
purpose, offering to pay a considerable sum yearly to the parish
authorities for liberty to collect the dust from the several houses.
The sum formerly paid to the parish of Shadwell, for instance, though
not a very extensive one, amounted to between 400_l._ or 500_l._ per
annum; but then there was an immense demand for the article, and the
contractors were unable to furnish a sufficient supply from London;
ships were frequently freighted with it from other parts, especially
from Newcastle and the northern ports, and at that time it formed an
article of considerable international commerce--the price being from
15_s._ to 1_l._ per chaldron. Of late years, however, the demand has
fallen off greatly, while the supply has been progressively increasing,
owing to the extension of the metropolis, so that the Contractors
have not only declined paying anything for liberty to collect it, but
now stipulate to receive a certain sum for the removal of it. It need
hardly be stated that the parishes always employ the man who requires
the least money for the performance of what has now become a matter
of duty rather than an object of desire. Some idea may be formed of
the change which has taken place in this business, from the fact, that
the aforesaid parish of Shadwell, which formerly received the sum
of 450_l._ per annum for liberty to collect the dust, now pays the
Contractor the sum of 240_l._ per annum for its removal.

The Court of Sewers of the City of London, in 1846, through the
advice of Mr. Cochrane, the president of the National Philanthropic
Association, were able to obtain from the contractors the sum of
5000_l._ for liberty to clear away the dirt from the streets and the
dust from the bins and houses in that district. The year following,
however, the contractors entered into a combination, and came to a
resolution not to bid so high for the privilege; the result was, that
they obtained their contracts at an expense of 2200_l._ By acting
on the same principle in the year after, they not only offered no
premium whatever for the contract, but the City Commissioners of Sewers
were obliged to pay them the sum of 300_l._ for removing the refuse,
and at present the amount paid by the City is as much as 4900_l._!
This is divided among four great contractors, and would, if equally
apportioned, give them 1250_l._ each.

I subjoin a list of the names of the principal contractors and the
parishes for which they are engaged:--

  DISTRICTS CONTRACTED               NAMES OF
          FOR.                      CONTRACTORS.

                                   { Redding.
  Four divisions of the City.      { Rook.
                                   { J. Sinnott.
                                   { J. Gould.
  Finsbury-square                  J. Gould.
  St. Luke’s                       H. Dodd.
  Shoreditch                        Ditto.
  Norton Folgate                   J. Gould.
  Bethnal-green                    E. Newman.
  Holborn                          Pratt and Sewell.
  Hatton-garden                         Ditto.
  Islington                        Stroud, Brickmaker.
  St. Martin’s                     Wm. Sinnott, Junior.
  St. Mary-le-Strand               J. Gore.
  St. Sepulchre                     Ditto.
  Savoy                             Ditto.
  St. Clement Danes                Rook.
  St. James’s, Clerkenwell         H. Dodd.
  St. John’s,    ditto             J. Gould.
  St. Margaret’s, Westminster      W. Hearne.
  St. John’s,       ditto          Stapleton and Holdsworth.
  Lambeth                          W. Hearne.
  Chelsea                          C. Humphries.
  St. Marylebone                   J. Gore.
  Blackfriars-bridge               Jenkins.
  St. Paul’s, Covent-garden        W. Sinnott.
  Piccadilly                       H. Tame.
  Regent-street and Pall-mall      W. Ridding.
  St. George’s, Hanover-sq.        H. Tame.
  Paddington                       C. Humphries.
  Camden-town                      Milton.
  St. Pancras, S.W. Division       W. Stapleton.
  Southampton estate               C. Starkey.
  Skinner’s ditto                  H. North.
  Brewer’s ditto                   C. Starkey.
  Cromer ditto                     Ditto.
  Calthorpe ditto                  Ditto.
  Bedford ditto                    Gore.
  Doughty ditto                    Martin.
  Union ditto                      J. Gore.
  Foundling ditto                  Pratt and Sewell.
  Harrison ditto                   Martin.
  St. Ann’s, Soho                  J. Gore.
  Whitechapel                      Parsons.
  Goswell-street                   Redding.
  Commercial-road, East            J. Sinnott.
  Mile-end                         Newman.
  Borough                          Hearne.
  Bermondsey                       The parish.
  Kensington                       H. Tame.
  St. Giles’s-in-the-Fields and
    St. George’s, Bloomsbury       Redding.
  Shadwell                         Westley.
  St. George’s-in-the-East         Ditto.
  Battle-bridge                    Starkey.
  Berkeley-square                  Clutterbuck.
  St. George’s, Pimlico            Redding.
  Woods and Forests                Ditto.
  St. Botolph                      Westley.
  St. John’s, Wapping              Ditto.
  Somers-town                      H. North.
  Kentish-town                     J. Gore.
  Rolls (Liberty of the)           Pratt and Sewell.
  Edward-square, Kensington        C. Humphries.

All the metropolitan parishes now pay the contractors various amounts
for the removal of the dust, and I am credibly informed that there is
a system of underletting and jobbing in the dust contracts extensively
carried on. The contractor for a certain parish is often a different
person from the master doing the work, who is unknown in the contract.
Occasionally the work would appear to be subdivided and underlet a
second time.

The parish of St. Pancras is split into no less than 21 districts, each
district having a separate and independent “Board,” who are generally
at war with each other, and make separate contracts for their several
divisions. This is also the case in other large parishes, and these
and other considerations confirm me in the conclusion that of large
and small dust-contractors, job-masters, and middle-men, of one kind
or the other, throughout the metropolis, there cannot be less than the
number I have stated--90. With the exception of Bermondsey, there are
no parishes who remove their own dust.

It is difficult to arrive at any absolute statement as to the gross
amount paid by the different parishes for the removal of the entire
dust of the metropolis. From Shadwell the contractor, as we have seen,
receives 250_l._; from the city the four contractors receive as much
as 5000_l._; but there are many small parishes in London which do not
pay above a tithe of the last-mentioned sum. Let us, therefore, assume,
that one with another, the several metropolitan parishes pay 200_l._
a year each to the dust contractor. According to the returns before
given, there are 176 parishes in London. Hence, the gross amount paid
for the removal of the entire dust of the metropolis will be between
30,000_l._ and 40,000_l._ per annum.

The removal of the dust throughout the metropolis, is, therefore,
carried on by a number of persons called Contractors, who undertake,
as has been stated, for a certain sum, to cart away the refuse from
the houses as frequently as the inhabitants desire it. To ascertain
the precise numbers of these contractors is a task of much greater
difficulty than might at first be conceived.

The London Post Office Directory gives the following number of
tradesmen connected with the removal of refuse from the houses and
streets of the metropolis.

  Dustmen           9
  Scavengers       10
  Nightmen         14
  Sweeps           32

But these numbers are obviously incomplete, for even a cursory
passenger through London must have noticed a greater number of names
upon the various dust carts to be met with in the streets than are here
set down.

A dust-contractor, who has been in the business upwards of 20 years,
stated that, from his knowledge of the trade, he should suppose that at
present there might be about 80 or 90 contractors in the metropolis.
Now, according to the returns before given, there are within the limits
of the Metropolitan Police District 176 parishes, and comparing this
with my informant’s statement, that many persons contract for more than
one parish (of which, indeed, he himself is an instance), there remains
but little reason to doubt the correctness of his supposition--that
there are, in all, between 80 or 90 dust-contractors, large and small,
connected with the metropolis. Assuming the aggregate number to be 88,
there would be one contractor to every two parishes.

These dust-contractors are likewise the contractors for the
cleansing of the streets, except where that duty is performed by the
Street-Orderlies; they are also the persons who undertake the emptying
of the cesspools in their neighbourhood; the latter operation, however,
is effected by an arrangement between themselves and the landlords
of the premises, and forms no part of their parochial contracts. At
the office of the Street Orderlies in Leicester Square, they have
knowledge of only 30 contractors connected with the metropolis; but
this is evidently defective, and refers to the “large masters” alone;
leaving out of all consideration, as it does, the host of small
contractors scattered up and down the metropolis, who are able to
employ only two or three carts and six or seven men each; many of such
small contractors being merely master sweeps who have managed to “get
on a little in the world,” and who are now able to contract, “in a
small way,” for the removal of dust, street-sweepings, and night-soil.
Moreover, many of even the “great contractors” being unwilling to
venture upon an outlay of capital for carts, horses, &c., when their
contract is only for a year, and may pass at the end of that time into
the hands of any one who may underbid them--many such, I repeat, are
in the habit of underletting a portion of their contract to others
possessing the necessary appliances, or of entering into partnership
with them. The latter is the case in the parish of Shadwell, where a
person having carts and horses shares the profits with the original
contractor. The agreement made on such occasions is, of course, a
secret, though the practice is by no means uncommon; indeed, there is
so much secrecy maintained concerning all matters connected with this
business, that the inquiry is beset with every possible difficulty.
The gentleman who communicated to me the amount paid by the parish
of Shadwell, and who informed me, moreover, that parishes in his
neighbourhood paid twice and three times more than Shadwell did, hinted
to me the difficulties I should experience at the commencement of my
inquiry, and I have certainly found his opinion correct to the letter.
I have ascertained that in one yard intimidation was resorted to, and
the men were threatened with instant dismissal if they gave me any
information but such as was calculated to mislead.

I soon discovered, indeed, that it was impossible to place any reliance
on what some of the contractors said; and here I may repeat that the
indisputable result of my inquiries has been to meet with far more
deception and equivocation from employers generally than from the
employed; working men have little or no motive for mis-stating their
wages; they know well that the ordinary rates of remuneration for their
labour are easily ascertainable from other members of the trade, and
seldom or never object to produce accounts of their earnings, whenever
they have been in the habit of keeping such things. With employers,
however, the case is far different; to seek to ascertain from them
the profits of their trade is to meet with evasion and prevarication
at every turn; they seem to feel that their gains are dishonestly
large, and hence resort to every means to prevent them being made
public. That I have met with many honourable exceptions to this rule,
I most cheerfully acknowledge; but that the _majority_ of tradesmen
are neither so frank, communicative, nor truthful, as the men in their
employ, the whole of my investigations go to prove. I have already, in
the _Morning Chronicle_, recorded the character of my interviews with
an eminent Jew slop-tailor, an army clothier, and an enterprising
free-trade stay-maker (a gentleman who subscribed his 100 guineas to
the League), and I must in candour confess that now, after two years’
experience, I have found the industrious poor a thousand-fold more
veracious than the trading rich.

With respect to the amount of business done by these contractors, or
gross quantity of dust collected by them in the course of the year,
it would appear that each employs, on an average, about 20 men, which
makes the number of men employed as dustmen through the streets of
London amount to 1800. This, as has been previously stated, is grossly
at variance with the number given in the Census of 1841, which computes
the dustmen in the metropolis at only 254. But, as I said before, I
have long ceased to place confidence in the government returns on such
subjects. According to the above estimate of 254, and deducting from
this number the 88 master-dustmen, there would be only 166 labouring
men to empty the 300,000 dustbins of London, and as these men always
work in couples, it follows that every two dustmen would have to remove
the refuse from about 3600 houses; so that assuming each bin to require
emptying once every six weeks they would have to cart away the dust
from 2400 houses every month, or 600 every week, which is at the rate
of 100 a day! and as each dust-bin contains about half a load, it would
follow that at this rate each cart would have to collect 50 loads of
dust daily, whereas 5 loads is the average day’s work.

Computing the London dust-contractors at 90, and the inhabited houses
at 300,000, it follows that each contractor would have 3333 houses to
remove the refuse from. Now it has been calculated that the ashes and
cinders alone from each house average about three loads per annum, so
that each contractor would have, in round numbers, 10,000 loads of
dust to remove in the course of the year. I find, from inquiries, that
every two dustmen carry to the yard about five loads a day, or about
1500 loads in the course of the year, so that at this rate, there must
be between six and seven carts, and twelve and fourteen collectors
employed by each master. But this is exclusive of the men employed
in the yards. In one yard that I visited there were fourteen people
busily employed. Six of these were women, who were occupied in sifting,
and they were attended by three men who shovelled the dust into their
sieves, and the foreman, who was hard at work loosening and dragging
down the dust from the heap, ready for the “fillers-in.” Besides these
there were two carts and four men engaged in conveying the sifted dust
to the barges alongside the wharf. At a larger dust-yard, that formerly
stood on the banks of the Regent’s-canal, I am informed that there were
sometimes as many as 127 people at work. It is but a small yard, which
has not 30 to 40 labourers connected with it; and the lesser dust-yards
have generally from four to eight sifters, and six or seven carts.
There are, therefore, employed in a medium-sized yard twelve collectors
or cartmen, six sifters, and three fillers-in, besides the foreman
or forewoman, making altogether 22 persons; so that, computing the
contractors at 90, and allowing 20 men to be employed by each, there
would be 1800 men thus occupied in the metropolis, which appears to be
very near the truth.

One who has been all his life connected with the business estimated
that there must be about ten dustmen to each metropolitan parish, large
and small. In Marylebone he believed there were eighteen dust-carts,
with two men to each, out every day; in some small parishes, however,
two men are sufficient. There would be more men employed, he said,
but some masters contracted for two or three parishes, and so “kept
the same men going,” working them hard, and enlarging their regular
rounds. Calculating, then, that ten men are employed to each of the 176
metropolitan parishes, we have 1760 dustmen in London. The suburban
parishes, my informant told me, were as well “dustmaned” as any he
knew; for the residents in such parts were more particular about their
dust than in busier places.

It is curious to observe how closely the number of men engaged in
the collection of the “dust” from the coals burnt in London agrees,
according to the above estimate, with the number of men engaged in
delivering the coals to be burnt. The coal-whippers, who “discharge the
colliers,” are about 1800, and the coal-porters, who carry the coals
from the barges to the merchants’ wagons, are about the same in number.
The amount of residuum from coal after burning cannot, of course,
be equal either in bulk or weight to the original substance; but
considering that the collection of the dust is a much slower operation
than the delivery of the coals, the difference is easily accounted for.

We may arrive, approximately, at the quantity of dust annually produced
in London, in the following manner:--

The consumption of coal in London, per annum, is about 3,500,000 tons,
exclusive of what is brought to the metropolis per rail. Coals are made
up of the following component parts, viz. (1) the inorganic and fixed
elements; that is to say, the ashes, or the bones, as it were, of the
fossil trees, which cannot be burnt; (2) coke, or the residuary carbon,
after being deprived of the volatile matter; (3) the volatile matter
itself given off during combustion in the form of flame and smoke.

The relative proportions of these materials in the various kinds of
coals are as follows.--

                                    Carbon,    Volatile,    Ashes,
                                   per cent.   per cent.   per cent.
  Cannel or gas coals.              40 to 60    60 to 40      10
  Newcastle or “house” coals.          57          37          5
  Lancashire and Yorkshire coals.   50 to 60    35 to 40       4
  South Welsh or “steam” coals.     81 to 85    11 to 15       3
  Anthracite or “stone” coals.      80 to 95      None      a little.

In the metropolis the Newcastle coal is chiefly used, and this, we
perceive, yields five per cent. ashes and about 57 per cent. carbon.
But a considerable part of the carbon is converted into carbonic acid
during combustion; if, therefore, we assume that two-thirds of the
carbon are thus consumed, and that the remaining third remains behind
in the form of cinder, we shall have about 25 per cent. of “dust” from
every ton of coal. On inquiry of those who have had long experience in
this matter, I find that a ton of coal may be fairly said on an average
to yield about one-fourth its weight in dust; hence the gross amount
of “dust” annually produced in London would be 900,000 tons, or about
three tons per house per annum.

It is impossible to obtain any definite statistics on this part of the
subject. Not one in every ten of the contractors keeps any account of
the amount that comes into the “yard.” An intelligent and communicative
gentleman whom I consulted on this matter, could give me no information
on this subject that was in any way satisfactory. I have, however,
endeavoured to check the preceding estimate in the following manner.
There are in London upwards of 300,000 inhabited houses, and each
house furnishes a certain quota of dust to the general stock. I have
ascertained that an average-sized house will produce, in the course of
a year, about three cart-loads of dust, while each cart holds about
40 bushels (baskets)--what the dustmen call a chaldron. There are, of
course, many houses in the metropolis which furnish three and four
times this amount of dust, but against these may be placed the vast
preponderance of small and poor houses in London and the suburbs, where
there is not one quarter of the quantity produced, owing to the small
amount of fuel consumed. Estimating, then, the average annual quantity
of dust from each house at three loads, or chaldrons, and the houses at
300,000, it follows that the gross quantity collected throughout the
metropolis will be about 900,000 chaldrons per annum.

The next part of the subject is--what becomes of this vast quantity of
dust--to what use it is applied.

The dust thus collected is used for two purposes, (1) as a manure for
land of a peculiar quality; and (2) for making bricks. The fine portion
of the house-dust called “soil,” and separated from the “brieze,” or
coarser portion, by sifting, is found to be peculiarly fitted for what
is called breaking up a marshy heathy soil at its first cultivation,
owing not only to the dry nature of the dust, but to its possessing in
an eminent degree a highly separating quality, almost, if not quite,
equal to sand. In former years the demand for this finer dust was very
great, and barges were continually in the river waiting their turn to
be loaded with it for some distant part of the country. At that time
the contractors were unable to supply the demand, and easily got 1_l._
per chaldron for as much as they could furnish, and then, as I have
stated, many ships were in the habit of bringing cargoes of it from
the North, and of realizing a good profit on the transaction. Of late
years, however--and particularly, I am told, since the repeal of the
corn-laws--this branch of the business has dwindled to nothing. The
contractors say that the farmers do not cultivate their land now as
they used; it will not pay them, and instead, therefore, of bringing
fresh land into tillage, and especially such as requires this sort
of manure, they are laying down that which they previously had in
cultivation, and turning it into pasture grounds. It is principally
on this account, say the contractors, that we cannot sell the dust we
collect so well or so readily as formerly. There are, however, some
cargoes of the dust still taken, particularly to the lowlands in the
neighbourhood of Barking, and such other places in the vicinity of the
metropolis as are enabled to realize a greater profit, by growing for
the London markets. Nevertheless, the contractors are obliged now to
dispose of the dust at 2_s._ 6_d._ per chaldron, and sometimes less.

The finer dust is also used to mix with the clay for making bricks,
and barge-loads are continually shipped off for this purpose. The
fine ashes are added to the clay in the proportion of one-fifth ashes
to four-fifths clay, or 60 chaldrons to 240 cubic yards, which is
sufficient to make 100,000 bricks (where much sand is mixed with the
clay a smaller proportion of ashes may be used). This quantity requires
also the addition of about 15 chaldrons, or, if mild, of about 12
chaldrons of “brieze,” to aid the burning. The ashes are made to mix
with the clay by collecting it into a sort of reservoir fitted up for
the purpose; water in great quantities is let in upon it, and it is
then stirred till it resembles a fine thin paste, in which state the
dust easily mingles with every part of it. In this condition it is left
till the water either soaks into the earth, or goes off by evaporation,
when the bricks are moulded in the usual manner, the dust forming a
component part of them.

The ashes, or cindered matter, which are thus dispersed throughout the
substance of the clay, become, in the process of burning, gradually
ignited and consumed. But the “brieze” (from the French _briser_, to
break or crush), that is to say, the coarser portion of the coal-ash,
is likewise used in the burning of the bricks. The small spaces left
among the lowest courses of the bricks in the kiln, or “clamp,” are
filled with “brieze,” and a thick layer of the same material is spread
on the top of the kilns, when full. Frequently the “brieze” is mixed
with small coals, and after having been burnt the ashes are collected,
and then mixed with the clay to form new bricks. The highest price at
present given for “brieze” is 3_s._ per ton.

The price of the dust used by the brickmakers has likewise been
reduced; this the contractors account for by saying that there are
fewer brick-fields than formerly near London, as they have been nearly
all built over. They assert, that while the amount of dust and cinders
has increased proportionately to the increase of the houses, the demand
for the article has decreased in a like ratio; and that, moreover, the
greater portion of the bricks now used in London for the new buildings
come from other quarters. Such dust, however, as the contractors
sell to the brick-makers, they in general undertake, for a certain
sum, to cart to the brick-fields, though it often happens that the
brick-makers’ carts coming into town with their loads of bricks to new
buildings, call on their return at the dust-yards, and carry thence a
load of dust or cinders back, and so save the price of cartage.

But during the operation of sifting the dust, many things are found
which are useless for either manure or brick-making, such as oyster
shells, old bricks, old boots and shoes, old tin kettles, old rags and
bones, &c. These are used for various purposes.

The bricks, &c., are sold for sinking beneath foundations, where a
thick layer of concrete is spread over them. Many old bricks, too, are
used in making new roads, especially where the land is low and marshy.
The old tin goes to form the japanned fastenings for the corners of
trunks, as well as to other persons, who re-manufacture it into a
variety of articles. The old shoes are sold to the London shoemakers,
who use them as stuffing between the in-sole and the outer one; but by
far the greater quantity is sold to the manufacturers of Prussian blue,
that substance being formed out of refuse animal matter. The rags and
bones are of course disposed of at the usual places--the marine-store
shops.

A dust-heap, therefore, may be briefly said to be composed of the
following things, which are severally applied to the following uses:--

1. “Soil,” or fine dust, sold to brickmakers for making bricks, and to
farmers for manure, especially for clover.

2. “Brieze,” or cinders, sold to brickmakers, for burning bricks.

3. Rags, bones, and old metal, sold to marine-store dealers.

4. Old tin and iron vessels, sold for “clamps” to trunks, &c., and for
making copperas.

5. Old bricks and oyster shells, sold to builders, for sinking
foundations, and forming roads.

6. Old boots and shoes, sold to Prussian-blue manufacturers.

7. Money and jewellery, kept, or sold to Jews.

The dust-yards, or places where the dust is collected and sifted, are
generally situated in the suburbs, and they may be found all round
London, sometimes occupying open spaces adjoining back streets and
lanes, and surrounded by the low mean houses of the poor; frequently,
however, they cover a large extent of ground in the fields, and
there the dust is piled up to a great height in a conical heap, and
having much the appearance of a volcanic mountain. The reason why
the dust-heaps are confined principally to the suburbs is, that more
space is to be found in the outskirts than in a thickly-peopled and
central locality. Moreover, the fear of indictments for nuisance has
had considerable influence in the matter, for it was not unusual for
the yards in former times, to be located within the boundaries of
the city. They are now, however, scattered round London, and always
placed as near as possible to the river, or to some canal communicating
therewith. In St. George’s, Shadwell, Ratcliffe, Limehouse, Poplar,
and Blackwall, on the north side of the Thames, and in Redriffe,
Bermondsey, and Rotherhithe, on the south, they are to be found near
the Thames. The object of this is, that by far the greater quantity of
the soil or ashes is conveyed in sailing-barges, holding from 70 to
100 tons each, to Feversham, Sittingbourne, and other places in Kent,
which are the great brick-making manufactories for London. These barges
come up invariably loaded with bricks, and take home in return a cargo
of soil. Other dust-yards are situated contiguous to the Regent’s
and the Surrey canal; and for the same reason as above stated--for
the convenience of water carriage. Moreover, adjoining the Limehouse
cut, which is a branch of the Lea River, other dust-yards may be
found; and again travelling to the opposite end of the metropolis, we
discover them not only at Paddington on the banks of the canal, but at
Maiden-lane in a similar position. Some time since there was an immense
dust-heap in the neighbourhood of Gray’s-inn-lane, which sold for
20,000_l._; but that was in the days when 15_s._ and 1_l._ per chaldron
could easily be procured for the dust. According to the present rate,
not a tithe of that amount could have been realized upon it.

[Illustration: VIEW OF A DUST YARD.

(_From a Sketch taken on the spot._)]

A visit to any of the large metropolitan dust-yards is far from
uninteresting. Near the centre of the yard rises the highest heap,
composed of what is called the “soil,” or finer portion of the dust
used for manure. Around this heap are numerous lesser heaps, consisting
of the mixed dust and rubbish carted in and shot down previous to
sifting. Among these heaps are many women and old men with sieves
made of iron, all busily engaged in separating the “brieze” from the
“soil.” There is likewise another large heap in some other part of the
yard, composed of the cinders or “brieze” waiting to be shipped off to
the brickfields. The whole yard seems alive, some sifting and others
shovelling the sifted soil on to the heap, while every now and then
the dust-carts return to discharge their loads, and proceed again on
their rounds for a fresh supply. Cocks and hens keep up a continual
scratching and cackling among the heaps, and numerous pigs seem to find
great delight in rooting incessantly about after the garbage and offal
collected from the houses and markets.

In a dust-yard lately visited the sifters formed a curious sight;
they were almost up to their middle in dust, ranged in a semi-circle
in front of that part of the heap which was being “worked;” each had
before her a small mound of soil which had fallen through her sieve and
formed a sort of embankment, behind which she stood. The appearance of
the entire group at their work was most peculiar. Their coarse dirty
cotton gowns were tucked up behind them, their arms were bared above
their elbows, their black bonnets crushed and battered like those
of fish-women; over their gowns they wore a strong leathern apron,
extending from their necks to the extremities of their petticoats,
while over this, again, was another leathern apron, shorter, thickly
padded, and fastened by a stout string or strap round the waist. In the
process of their work they pushed the sieve from them and drew it back
again with apparent violence, striking it against the outer leathern
apron with such force that it produced each time a hollow sound, like
a blow on the tenor drum. All the women present were middle aged,
with the exception of one who was very old--68 years of age she told
me--and had been at the business from a girl. She was the daughter of
a dustman, the wife, or woman of a dustman, and the mother of several
young dustmen--sons and grandsons--all at work at the dust-yards at the
east end of the metropolis.

We now come to speak of the labourers engaged in collecting, sifting,
or shipping off the dust of the metropolis.

The dustmen, scavengers, and nightmen are, to a certain extent, the
same people. The contractors generally agree with the various parishes
to remove both the dust from the houses and the mud from the streets;
the men in their employ are indiscriminately engaged in these two
diverse occupations, collecting the dust to-day, and often cleansing
the streets on the morrow, and are designated either dustmen or
scavengers, according to their particular avocation at the moment. The
case is somewhat different, however, with respect to the nightmen.
There is no such thing as a contract with the parish for removing the
nightsoil. This is done by private agreement with the landlord of the
premises whence the soil has to be removed. When a cesspool requires
emptying, the occupying tenant communicates with the landlord, who
makes an arrangement with a dust-contractor or sweep-nightman for
this purpose. This operation is totally distinct from the regular
or daily labour of the dust-contractor’s men, who receive extra pay
for it; sometimes one set go out at night and sometimes another,
according either to the selection of the master or the inclination of
the men. There are, however, some dustmen who have never been at work
as nightmen, and could not be induced to do so, from an invincible
antipathy to the employment; still, such instances are few, for the men
generally go whenever they can, and occasionally engage in nightwork
for employers unconnected with their masters. It is calculated that
there are some hundreds of men employed nightly in the removal of the
nightsoil of the metropolis during the summer and autumn, and as these
men have often to work at dust-collecting or cleansing the streets on
the following day, it is evident that the same persons cannot be thus
employed every night; accordingly the ordinary practice is for the
dustmen to “take it in turns,” thus allowing each set to be employed
every third night, and to have two nights’ rest in the interim.

The men, therefore, who collect the dust on one day may be cleaning the
streets on the next, especially during wet weather, and engaged at
night, perhaps, twice during the week, in removing nightsoil; so that
it is difficult to arrive at any precise notion as to the number of
persons engaged in any one of these branches _per se_.

But these labourers not only work indiscriminately at the collection of
dust, the cleansing of the streets, or the removal of nightsoil, but
they are employed almost as indiscriminately at the various branches
of the dust business; with this qualification, however, that few men
apply themselves continuously to any one branch of the business. The
labourers employed in a dust-yard may be divided into two classes:
those paid by the contractor; and those paid by the foreman or
forewoman of the dust-heap, commonly called hill-man or hill-woman.

They are as follows:--

 I. LABOURERS PAID BY THE CONTRACTORS, OR,

   1. _Yard foreman_, or superintendent. This duty is often performed by
   the master, especially in small contracts.

   2. _Gangers_ or _dust-collectors_. These are called “fillers” and
   “carriers,” from the practice of one of the men who go out with the
   cart filling the basket, and the other carrying it on his shoulder to
   the vehicle.

   3. _Loaders_ of carts in the dust-yard for shipment.

   4. _Carriers_ of cinders to the cinder-heap, or bricks to the
   brick-heap.

   5. _Foreman_ or _forewoman_ of the heap.

 II. LABOURERS PAID BY THE HILL-MAN OR HILL-WOMAN.

   1. _Sifters_, who are generally women, and mostly the wives or
   concubines of the dustmen, but sometimes the wives of badly-paid
   labourers.

   2. _Fillers-in_, or shovellers of dust into the sieves of the sifters
   (one man being allowed to every two or three women).

   3. _Carriers off_ of bones, rags, metal, and other perquisites to the
   various heaps; these are mostly children of the dustmen.

A medium-sized dust-yard will employ about twelve collectors, three
fillers-in, six sifters, and one foreman or forewoman; while a large
yard will afford work to about 150 people.

There are four different modes of payment prevalent among the several
labourers employed at the metropolitan dust-yards:--(1) by the day; (2)
by the piece or load; (3) by the lump; (4) by perquisites.

1st. The foreman of the yard, where the master does not perform this
duty himself, is generally one of the regular dustmen picked out by
the master, for this purpose. He is paid, the sum of 2_s._ 6_d._ per
day, or 15_s._ per week. In large yards there are sometimes two and
even three yard-foremen at the same rate of wages. Their duty is
merely to superintend the work. They do not labour themselves, and
their exemption in this respect is considered, and indeed looked on by
themselves, as a sort of premium for good services.

[Illustration: THE LONDON DUSTMAN.

DUST HOI! DUST HOI!

[_From a Daguerreotype by_ BEARD.]]

2nd. The gangers or collectors are generally paid 8_d._ per load for
every load they bring into the yard. This is, of course, piece work,
for the more hours the men work the more loads will they be enabled to
bring, and the more pay will they receive. There are some yards where
the carters get only 6_d._ per load, as, for instance, at Paddington.
The Paddington men, however, are not considered inferior workmen to
the rest of their fellows, but merely to be worse paid. In 1826, or
25 years ago, the carters had 1_s._ 6_d._ per load; but at that time
the contractors were able to get 1_l._ per chaldron for the soil and
“brieze” or cinders; then it began to fall in value, and according
to the decrease in the price of these commodities, so have the wages
of the dust-collectors been reduced. It will be at once seen that
the reduction in the wages of the dustmen bears no proportion to the
reduction in the price of soil and cinders, but it must be borne in
mind that whereas the contractors formerly paid large sums for liberty
to collect the dust, they now are paid large sums to remove it. This
in some measure helps to account for the apparent disproportion, and
tends, perhaps, to equalize the matter. The gangers, therefore, have
4_d._ each, per load when best paid. They consider from four to six
loads a good day’s work, for where the contract is large, extending
over several parishes, they often have to travel a long way for a
load. It thus happens that while the men employed by the Whitechapel
contractor can, when doing their utmost, manage to bring only four
loads a day to the yard, which is situated in a place called the
“ruins” in Lower Shadwell, the men employed by the Shadwell contractor
can easily get eight or nine loads in a day. Five loads are about an
average day’s work, and this gives them 1_s._ 8-1/2_d._ per day each,
or 10_s._ per week. In addition to this, the men have their perquisites
“in aid of wages.” The collectors are in the habit of getting beer or
money in lieu thereof, at nearly all the houses from which they remove
the dust, the public being thus in a manner compelled to make up the
rate of wages, which should be paid by the employer, so that what is
given to benefit the men really goes to the master, who invariably
reduces the wages to the precise amount of the perquisites obtained.
This is the main evil of the “perquisite system of payment” (a system
of which the mode of paying waiters may be taken as the special type).
As an instance of the injurious effects of this mode of payment in
connection with the London dustmen, the collectors are forced, as it
were, to extort from the public that portion of their fair earnings of
which their master deprives them; hence, how can we wonder that they
make it a rule when they receive neither beer nor money from a house to
make as great a mess as possible the next time they come, scattering
the dust and cinders about in such a manner, that, sooner than have
any trouble with them, people mostly give them what they look for?
One of the most intelligent men with whom I have spoken, gave me the
following account of his perquisites for the last week, viz.: Monday,
5-1/2_d._; Tuesday, 6_d._; Wednesday, 4-1/2_d._; Thursday, 7_d._;
Friday, 5-1/2_d._; and Saturday, 5_d._ This he received in money, and
was independent of beer. He had on the same week drawn rather more than
five loads each day, to the yard, which made his gross earnings for the
week, wages and perquisites together, to be 14_s._ 0-1/2_d._ which he
considers to be a fair average of his weekly earnings as connected with
dust.

3rd. The loaders of the carts for shipment are the same persons as
those who collect the dust, but thus employed for the time being. The
pay for this work is by the “piece” also, 2_d._ per chaldron between
four persons being the usual rate, or 1/2_d._ per man. The men so
engaged have no perquisites. The barges into which they shoot the soil
or “brieze,” as the case may be, hold from 50 to 70 chaldrons, and they
consider the loading of one of these barges a good day’s work. The
average cargo is about 60 chaldrons, which gives them 2_s._ 6_d._ per
day, or somewhat more than their average earnings when collecting.

4th. The carriers of cinders to the cinder heap. I have mentioned that,
ranged round the sifters in the dust-yard, are a number of baskets,
into which are put the various things found among the dust, some of
these being the property of the master, and others the perquisites of
the hill man or woman, as the case may be. The cinders and old bricks
are the property of the master, and to remove them to their proper
heaps boys are employed by him at 1_s._ per day. These boys are almost
universally the children of dustmen and sifters at work in the yard,
and thus not only help to increase the earnings of the family, but
qualify themselves to become the dustmen of a future day.

5th. The hill-man or hill-woman. The hill-man enters into an agreement
with the contractor to sift _all_ the dust in the yard throughout
the year at so much per load and perquisites. The usual sum per
load is 6_d._, nor have I been able to ascertain that any of these
people undertake to do it at a less price. Such is the amount paid
by the contractor for Whitechapel. The perquisites of the hill-man
or hill-woman, are rags, bones, pieces of old metal, old tin or iron
vessels, old boots and shoes, and one-half of the money, jewellery, or
other valuables that may be found by the sifters.

The hill-man or hill-woman employs the following persons, and pays them
at the following rates.

1st. The sifters are paid 1_s._ per day when employed, but the
employment is not constant. The work cannot be pursued in wet weather,
and the services of the sifters are required only when a large heap
has accumulated, as they can sift much faster than the dust can be
collected. The employment is therefore precarious; the payment has
not, for the last 30 years at least, been more than 1_s._ per day, but
the perquisites were greater. They formerly were allowed one-half of
whatever was found; of late years, however, the hill-man has gradually
reduced the perquisites “first one thing and then another,” until
the only one they have now remaining is half of whatever money or
other valuable article may be found in the process of sifting. These
valuables the sifters often pocket, if able to do so unperceived, but
if discovered in the attempt, they are immediately discharged.

2nd. “The fillers-in,” or shovellers of dust into the sieves of
sifters, are in general any poor fellows who may be straggling about in
search of employment. They are sometimes, however, the grown-up boys
of dustmen, not yet permanently engaged by the contractor. These are
paid 2_s._ per day for their labour, but they are considered more as
casualty men, though it often happens, if “hands” are wanted, that they
are regularly engaged by the contractors, and become regular dustmen
for the remainder of their lives.

3rd. The little fellows, the children of the dustmen, who follow their
mothers to the yard, and help them to pick rags, bones, &c., out of the
sieve and put them into the baskets, as soon as they are able to carry
a basket between two of them to the separate heaps, are paid 3_d._ or
4_d._ per day for this work by the hill-man.

The wages of the dustmen have been increased within the last seven
years from 6_d._ per load to 8_d._ among the large contractors--the
“small masters,” however, still continue to pay 6_d._ per load. This
increase in the rate of remuneration was owing to the men complaining
to the commissioners that they were not able to live upon what they
earned at 6_d._; an enquiry was made into the truth of the men’s
assertion, and the result was that the commissioners decided upon
letting the contracts to such parties only as would undertake to pay a
fair price to their workmen. The contractors, accordingly, increased
the remuneration of the labourers; since then the principal masters
have paid 8_d._ per load to the collectors. It is right I should
add, that I could not hear--though I made special enquiries on the
subject--that the wages had been in any one instance reduced since
Free-trade has come into operation.

The usual hours of labour vary according to the mode of payment. The
“collectors,” or men out with the cart, being paid by the load, work
as long as the light lasts; the “fillers-in” and sifters, on the other
hand, being paid by the day, work the ordinary hours, viz., from six to
six, with the regular intervals for meals.

The summer is the worst time for all hands, for then the dust decreases
in quantity; the collectors, however, make up for the “slackness” at
this period by nightwork, and, being paid by the “piece” or load at the
dust business, are not discharged when their employment is less brisk.

It has been shown that the dustmen who perambulate the streets usually
collect five loads in a day; this, at 8_d._ per load, leaves them
about 1_s._ 8_d._ each, and so makes their weekly earnings amount to
about 10_s._ per week. Moreover, there are the “perquisites” from the
houses whence they remove the dust; and further, the dust-collectors
are frequently employed at the night-work, which is always a distinct
matter from the dust-collecting, &c., and paid for independent of their
regular weekly wages, so that, from all I can gather, the average wages
of the men appear to be rather more than 15_s._ Some admitted to me,
that in busy times they often earned 25_s._ a week.

Then, again, dustwork, as with the weaving of silk, is a kind of
family work. The husband, wife, and children (unfortunately) all work
at it. The consequence is, that the earnings of the whole have to be
added together in order to arrive at a notion of the aggregate gains.

The following may therefore be taken as a fair average of the earnings
of a dustman and his family _when in full employment_. The elder boys
when able to earn 1_s._ a day set up for themselves, and do not allow
their wages to go into the common purse.

                             £.  _s._  _d._     £.  _s._  _d._

  Man, 5 loads per day,
  or 30 loads per week, at
  4_d._ per load             0    10    0

  Perquisites, or beer
  money                      0     2    9-1/2

  Night-work for 2 nights
  a week                     0     5    0
                             ------------       0    17    9-1/2

  Woman, or sifter, per
  week, at 1_s._ per day     0     6    0

  Perquisites, say 3_d._ a
  day                        0     1    6
                             ------------       0     7    6

  Child, 3_d._ per day,
  carrying rags, bones, &c.  ------------       0     1    6
                                               -----------------
                        Total                   1     6    9-1/2

These are the earnings, it should be borne in mind, of a family in full
employment. Perhaps it may be fairly said that the earnings of the
single men are, on an average, 15_s._ a week, and 1_l._ for the family
men all the year round.

Now, when we remember that the wages of many agricultural labourers are
but 8_s._ a week, and the earnings of many needlewomen not 6_d._ a day,
it must be confessed that the remuneration of the dustmen, and even of
the dustwomen, is _comparatively_ high. This certainly is not due to
what Adam Smith, in his chapter on the Difference of Wages, terms the
“disagreeableness of the employment.” “The wages of labour,” he says,
“vary with the ease or hardship, the cleanliness or dirtiness, the
honourableness or dishonourableness, of the employment.” It will be
seen--when we come to treat of the nightmen--that the most offensive,
and perhaps the least honourable, of all trades, is far from ranking
among the best paid, as it should, if the above principle held good.
That the disagreeableness of the occupation may in a measure tend to
decrease the competition among the labourers, there cannot be the least
doubt, but that it will consequently induce, as political economy would
have us believe, a larger amount of wages to accrue to each of the
labourers, is certainly another of the many assertions of that science
which must be pronounced “not proven.” For the dustmen are paid, if
anything, less, and certainly not more, than the usual rate of payment
to the London labourers; and if the earnings rank high, as times go, it
is because all the members of the family, from the very earliest age,
are able to work at the business, and so add to the general gains.

The dustmen are, generally speaking, an hereditary race; when
children they are reared in the dust-yard, and are habituated to the
work gradually as they grow up, after which, almost as a natural
consequence, they follow the business for the remainder of their lives.
These may be said to be born-and-bred dustmen. The numbers of the
regular men are, however, from time to time recruited from the ranks
of the many ill-paid labourers with which London abounds. When hands
are wanted for any special occasion an employer has only to go to any
of the dock-gates, to find at all times hundreds of starving wretches
anxiously watching for the chance of getting something to do, even at
the rate of 4_d._ per hour. As the operation of emptying a dust-bin
requires only the ability to handle a shovel, which every labouring man
can manage, all workmen, however unskilled, can at once engage in the
occupation; and it often happens that the men thus casually employed
remain at the calling for the remainder of their lives. There are no
houses of call whence the men are taken on when wanting work. There are
certainly public-houses, which are denominated houses of call, in the
neighbourhood of every dust-yard, but these are merely the drinking
shops of the men, whither they resort of an evening after the labour of
the day is accomplished, and whence they are furnished in the course of
the afternoon with beer; but such houses cannot be said to constitute
the dustman’s “labour-market,” as in the tailoring and other trades,
they being never resorted to as hiring-places, but rather used by the
men only when hired. If a master have not enough “hands” he usually
inquires among his men, who mostly know some who--owing, perhaps, to
the failure of their previous master in getting his usual contract--are
only casually employed at other places. Such men are immediately
engaged in preference to others; but if these cannot be found, the
contractors at once have recourse to the system already stated.

The manner in which the dust is collected is very simple. The “filler”
and the “carrier” perambulate the streets with a heavily-built high
box cart, which is mostly coated with a thick crust of filth, and
drawn by a clumsy-looking horse. These men used, before the passing
of the late Street Act, to ring a dull-sounding bell so as to give
notice to housekeepers of their approach, but now they merely cry, in
a hoarse unmusical voice, “Dust oy-eh!” Two men accompany the cart,
which is furnished with a short ladder and two shovels and baskets.
These baskets one of the men fills from the dust-bin, and then helps
them alternately, as fast as they are filled, upon the shoulder of the
other man, who carries them one by one to the cart, which is placed
immediately alongside the pavement in front of the house where they are
at work. The carrier mounts up the side of the cart by means of the
ladder, discharges into it the contents of the basket on his shoulder,
and then returns below for the other basket which his mate has filled
for him in the interim. This process is pursued till all is cleared
away, and repeated at different houses till the cart is fully loaded;
then the men make the best of their way to the dust-yard, where they
shoot the contents of the cart on to the heap, and again proceed on
their regular rounds.

The dustmen, in their appearance, very much resemble the waggoners
of the coal-merchants. They generally wear knee-breeches, with ancle
boots or gaiters, short dirty smockfrocks or coarse gray jackets, and
fantail hats. In one particular, however, they are at first sight
distinguishable from the coal-merchants’ men, for the latter are
invariably black from coal dust, while the dustmen, on the contrary,
are gray with ashes.

In their personal appearance the dustmen are mostly tall stalwart
fellows; there is nothing sickly-looking about them, and yet a
considerable part of their time is passed in the yards and in the midst
of effluvia most offensive, and, if we believe “zymotic theorists,” as
unhealthy to those unaccustomed to them; nevertheless, the children,
who may be said to be reared in the yard and to have inhaled the stench
of the dust-heap with their first breath, are healthy and strong. It
is said, moreover, that during the plague in London the dustmen were
the persons who carted away the dead, and it remains a tradition among
the class to the present day, that not one of them died of the plague,
even during its greatest ravages. In Paris, too, it is well known,
that, during the cholera of 1849, the quarter of Belleville, where the
night-soil and refuse of the city is deposited, escaped the freest from
the pestilence; and in London the dustmen boast that, during both the
recent visitations of the cholera, they were altogether exempt from the
disease. “Look at that fellow, sir!” said one of the dust-contractors
to me, pointing to his son, who was a stout red-cheeked young man of
about twenty. “Do you see anything ailing about him? Well, he has been
in the yard since he was born. There stands my house just at the gate,
so you see he hadn’t far to travel, and when quite a child he used to
play and root away here among the dust all his time. I don’t think he
ever had a day’s illness in his life. The people about the yard are
all used to the smell and don’t complain about it. It’s all stuff and
nonsense, all this talk about dust-yards being unhealthy. I’ve never
done anything else all my days and I don’t think I look very ill. I
shouldn’t wonder now but what I’d be set down as being fresh from
the sea-side by those very fellows that write all this trash about a
matter that they don’t know just _that_ about;” and he snapped his
fingers contemptuously in the air, and, thrusting both hands into his
breeches pockets, strutted about, apparently satisfied that he had the
best of the argument. He was, in fact, a stout, jolly, red-faced man.
Indeed, the dustmen, as a class, appear to be healthy, strong men, and
extraordinary instances of longevity are common among them. I heard of
one dustman who lived to be 115 years; another, named Wood, died at
100; and the well-known Richard Tyrrell died only a short time back at
the advanced age of 97. The misfortune is, that we have no large series
of facts on this subject, so that the longevity and health of the
dustmen might be compared with those of other classes.

In almost all their habits the Dustmen are similar to the
Costermongers, with the exception that they seem to want their cunning
and natural quickness, and that they have little or no predilection
for gaming. Costermongers, however, are essentially traders, and all
trade is a species of gambling--the risking of a certain sum of money
to obtain more; hence spring, perhaps, the gambling propensities of low
traders, such as costers, and Jew clothes-men; and hence, too, that
natural sharpness which characterizes the same classes. The dustmen, on
the contrary, have regular employment and something like regular wages,
and therefore rest content with what they can earn in their usual way
of business.

Very few of them understand cards, and I could not learn that they ever
play at “pitch and toss.” I remarked, however, a number of parallel
lines such as are used for playing “shove halfpenny,” on a deal table
in the tap-room frequented by them. The great amusement of their
evenings seems to be, to smoke as many pipes of tobacco and drink as
many pots of beer as possible.

I believe it will be found that all persons in the habit of driving
horses, such as cabmen, ’busmen, stage-coach drivers, &c., are
peculiarly partial to intoxicating drinks. The cause of this I
leave others to determine, merely observing that there would seem
to be two reasons for it: the first is, their frequent stopping at
public-houses to water or change their horses, so that the idea of
drinking is repeatedly suggested to their minds even if the practice
be not _expected_ of them; while the second reason is, that being
out continually in the wet, they resort to stimulating liquors as a
preventive to “colds” until at length a habit of drinking is formed.
Moreover, from the mere fact of passing continually through the
air, they are enabled to drink a greater quantity with comparative
impunity. Be the cause, however, what it may, the dustmen spend a
large proportion of their earnings in drink. There is always some
public-house in the neighbourhood of the dust-yard, where they obtain
credit from one week to another, and here they may be found every night
from the moment their work is done, drinking, and smoking their long
pipes--their principal amusement consisting in “chaffing” each other.
This “chaffing” consists of a species of scurrilous jokes supposed to
be given and taken in good part, and the noise and uproar occasioned
thereby increases as the night advances, and as the men get heated
with liquor. Sometimes the joking ends in a general quarrel; the next
morning, however, they are all as good friends as ever, and mutually
agree in laying the blame on the “cussed drink.”

One-half, at least, of the dustmen’s earnings, is, I am assured,
expended in drink, both man and woman assisting in squandering their
money in this way. They usually live in rooms for which they pay
from 1_s._ 6_d._ to 2_s._ per week rent, three or four dust-men and
their wives frequently lodging in the same house. These rooms are
cheerless-looking, and almost unfurnished--and are always situate
in some low street or lane not far from the dust-yard. The men have
rarely any clothes but those in which they work. For their breakfast
the dustmen on their rounds mostly go to some cheap coffee-house, where
they get a pint or half-pint of coffee, taking their bread with them as
a matter of economy. Their midday meal is taken in the public-house,
and is almost always bread and cheese and beer, or else a saveloy or a
piece of fat pork or bacon, and at night they mostly “wind up” by deep
potations at their favourite house of call.

There are many dustmen now advanced in years born and reared at the
East-end of London, who have never in the whole course of their
lives been as far west as Temple-bar, who know nothing whatever of
the affairs of the country, and who have never attended a place of
worship. As an instance of the extreme ignorance of these people, I
may mention that I was furnished by one of the contractors with the
address of a dustman whom his master considered to be one of the most
intelligent men in his employ. Being desirous of hearing his statement
from his own lips I sent for the man, and after some conversation
with him was proceeding to note down what he said, when the moment I
opened my note-book and took the pencil in my hand, he started up,
exclaiming,--“No, no! I’ll have none of that there work--I’m not such
a b---- fool as you takes me to be--I doesn’t understand it, I tells
you, and I’ll not have it, now that’s plain;”--and so saying he ran out
of the room, and descended the entire flight of stairs in two jumps. I
followed him to explain, but unfortunately the pencil was still in one
hand and the book in the other, and immediately I made my appearance
at the door he took to his heels, again with three others who seemed
to be waiting for him there. One of the most difficult points in my
labours is to make such men as these comprehend the object or use of my
investigations.

Among 20 men whom I met in one yard, there were only five who could
read, and only two out of that five could write, even imperfectly.
These two are looked up to by their companions as prodigies of learning
and are listened to as oracles, on all occasions, being believed to
understand every subject thoroughly. It need hardly be added, however,
that their acquirements are of the most meagre character.

The dustmen are very partial to a song, and always prefer one of the
doggrel street ballads, with what they call a “jolly chorus” in which,
during their festivities, they all join with stentorian voices. At the
conclusion there is usually a loud stamping of feet and rattling of
quart pots on the table, expressive of their approbation.

The dustmen never frequent the twopenny hops, but sometimes make up
a party for the “theaytre.” They generally go in a body with their
wives, if married, and their “gals,” if single. They are always to
be found in the gallery, and greatly enjoy the melodramas performed
at the second-class minor theatres, especially if there be plenty of
murdering scenes in them. The Garrick, previous to its being burnt, was
a favourite resort of the East-end dustmen. Since that period they
have patronized the Pavilion and the City of London.

The politics of the dustmen are on a par with their literary
attainments--they cannot be said to have any. I cannot say that they
are Chartists, for they have no very clear knowledge of what “the
charter” requires. They certainly have a confused notion that it is
something against the Government, and that the enactment of it would
make them all right; but as to the nature of the benefits which it
would confer upon them, or in what manner it would be likely to operate
upon their interest, they have not, as a body, the slightest idea.
They have a deep-rooted antipathy to the police, the magistrates, and
all connected with the administration of justice, looking upon them as
their natural enemies. They associate with none but themselves; and in
the public-houses where they resort there is a room set apart for the
special use of the “dusties,” as they are called, where no others are
allowed to intrude, except introduced by one of themselves, or at the
special desire of the majority of the party, and on such occasions the
stranger is treated with great respect and consideration.

As to the morals of these people, it may easily be supposed that they
are not of an over-strict character. One of the contractors said to
me, “I’d just trust one of them as far as I could fling a bull by the
tail; _but then_,” he added, with a callousness that proved the laxity
of discipline among the men was due more to his neglect of his duty to
them than from any special perversity on their parts, “_that’s none of
my business; they do my work, and that’s all I want with them, and all
I care about_. You see they’re not like other people, they’re reared to
it. Their fathers before them were dustmen, and when lads they go into
the yard as sifters, and when they grow up they take to the shovel,
and go out with the carts. They learn all they know in the dust-yards,
and you may judge from that what their learning is likely to be. If
they find anything among the dust you may be sure that neither you
nor I will ever hear anything about it; ignorant as they are, they
know a little too much for that. They know, as well as here and there
one, where the dolly-shop is; _but, as I said before, that’s none of
my business. Let every one look out for themselves, as I do, and then
they need not care for any one_.” [With such masters professing such
principles--though it should be stated that the sentiments expressed
on this occasion are but similar to what I hear from the lower class
of traders every day--how can it be expected that these poor fellows
can be above the level of the mere beasts of burden that they use.] “As
to their women,” continued the master, “I don’t trouble my head about
such things. I believe the dustmen are as good to them as other men;
and I’m sure their wives would be as good as other women, if they only
had the chance of the best. But you see they’re all such fellows for
drink that they spend most of their money that way, and then starve the
poor women, and knock them about at a shocking rate, so that they have
the life of dogs, or worse. I don’t wonder at anything they do. Yes,
they’re all married, as far as I know; that is, they live together as
man and wife, though they’re not very particular, certainly, about the
ceremony. The fact is, a regular dustman don’t understand much about
such matters, and, I believe, don’t care much, either.”

From all I could learn on this subject, it would appear that, for one
dustman that is married, 20 live with women, but remain constant to
them; indeed, both men and women abide faithfully by each other, and
for this reason--the woman earns nearly half as much as the man. If the
men and women were careful and prudent, they might, I am assured, live
well and comfortable; but by far the greater portion of the earnings
of both go to the publican, for I am informed, on competent authority,
that a dustman will not think of sitting down for a spree without his
woman. The children, as soon as they are able to go into the yard, help
their mothers in picking out the rags, bones, &c., from the sieve,
and in putting them in the basket. They are never sent to school, and
as soon as they are sufficiently strong are mostly employed in some
capacity or other by the contractor, and in due time become dustmen
themselves. Some of the children, in the neighbourhood of the river,
are mud-larks, and others are bone-grubbers and rag-gatherers, on a
small scale; neglected and thrown on their own resources at an early
age, without any but the most depraved to guide them, it is no wonder
to find that many of them turn thieves. To this state of the case there
are, however, some few exceptions.

Some of the dustmen are prudent well-behaved men and have decent homes;
many of this class have been agricultural labourers, who by distress,
or from some other cause, have found their way to London. This was the
case with one whom I talked with: he had been a labourer in Essex,
employed by a farmer named Izzod, whom he spoke of as being a kind good
man. Mr. Izzod had a large farm on the Earl of Mornington’s estate,
and after he had sunk his capital in the improvement of the land, and
was about to reap the fruits of his labour and his money, the farmer
was ejected at a moment’s notice, beggared and broken-hearted. This
occurred near Roydon, in Essex. The labourer, finding it difficult to
obtain work in the country, came to London, and, discovering a cousin
of his engaged in a dust-yard, got employed through him at the same
place, where he remains to the present day. This man was well clothed,
he had good strong lace boots, gray worsted stockings, a stout pair of
corduroy breeches, a short smockfrock and fantail. He has kept himself
aloof, I am told, from the drunkenness and dissipation of the dustmen.
He says that many of the new hands that get to dustwork are mechanics
or people who have been “better off,” and that these get thinking about
what they have been, till to drown their care they take to drinking,
and often become, in the course of a year or so, worse than the “old
hands” who have been reared to the business and have “nothing at all to
think about.”

Among the dustmen there is no “Society” nor “Benefit Club,” specially
devoted to the class--no provident institution whence they can obtain
“relief” in the event of sickness or accident. The consequence is that,
when ill or injured, they are obliged to obtain letters of admission
to some of the hospitals, and there remain till cured. In cases of
total incapacity for labour, their invariable refuge is the workhouse;
indeed they look forward (whenever they foresee at all) to this asylum
as their resting-place in old age, with the greatest equanimity, and
talk of it as “the house” par excellence, or as “the big house,” “the
great house,” or “the old house.” There are, however, scattered about
in every part of London numerous benefit clubs made up of working-men
of every description, such as Old Friends, Odd Fellows, Foresters, and
Birmingham societies, and with some one or other of these the better
class of dustmen are connected. The general rule, however, is, that
the men engaged in this trade belong to no benefit club whatever, and
that in the season of their adversity they are utterly unprovided for,
and consequently become burdens to the parishes wherein they happen to
reside.

I visited a large dust-yard at the east end of London, for the purpose
of getting a statement from one of the men. My informant was, at the
time of my visit, shovelling the sifted soil from one of the lesser
heaps, and, by a great effort of strength and activity, pitching each
shovel-full to the top of a lofty mound, somewhat resembling a pyramid.
Opposite to him stood a little woman, stoutly made, and with her arms
bare above the elbow; she was his partner in the work, and was pitching
shovel-full for shovel-full with him to the summit of the heap. She
wore an old soiled cotton gown, open in front, and tucked up behind in
the fashion of the last century. She had clouts of old rags tied round
her ancles to prevent the dust from getting into her shoes, a sort of
coarse towel fastened in front for an apron, and a red handkerchief
bound tightly round her head. In this trim she worked away, and not
only kept pace with the man, but often threw two shovels for his one,
although he was a tall, powerful fellow. She smiled when she saw me
noticing her, and seemed to continue her work with greater assiduity. I
learned that she was deaf, and spoke so indistinctly that no stranger
could understand her. She had also a defect in her sight, which latter
circumstance had compelled her to abandon the sifting, as she could not
well distinguish the various articles found in the dust-heap. The poor
creature had therefore taken to the shovel, and now works with it every
day, doing the labour of the strongest men.

From the man above referred to I obtained the following
statement:--“Father vos a dustie;--vos at it all his life, and
grandfather afore him for I can’t tell how long. Father vos allus a rum
’un;--sich a beggar for lush. Vhy I’m blowed if he vouldn’t lush as
much as half-a-dozen on ’em can lush now; somehow the dusties hasn’t
got the stuff in ’em as they used to have. A few year ago the fellers
’u’d think nothink o’ lushin avay for five or six days without niver
going anigh their home. I niver vos at a school in all my life; I don’t
know what it’s good for. It may be wery well for the likes o’ you, but
I doesn’t know it ’u’d do a dustie any good. You see, ven I’m not out
with the cart, I digs here all day; and p’raps I’m up all night, and
digs avay agen the next day. Vot does I care for reading, or anythink
of that there kind, ven I gets home arter my vork? I tell you vot I
likes, though! vhy, I jist likes two or three pipes o’ baccer, and a
pot or two of good heavy and a song, and then I tumbles in with my
Sall, and I’m as happy as here and there von. That there Sall of mine’s
a stunner--a riglar stunner. There ain’t never a voman can sift a heap
quickerer nor my Sall. Sometimes she yarns as much as I does; the only
thing is, she’s sitch a beggar for lush, that there Sall of mine, and
then she kicks up sitch jolly rows, you niver see the like in your
life. That there’s the only fault, as I know on, in Sall; but, barring
that, she’s a hout-and-houter, and worth a half-a-dozen of t’ other
sifters--pick ’em out vare you likes. No, we ain’t married ’zactly,
though it’s all one for all that. I sticks to Sall, and Sall sticks
to I, and there’s an end on’t:--vot is it to any von? I rec’lects
a-picking the rags and things out of mother’s sieve, when I were a
young ’un, and a putting ’em all in the heap jist as it might be there.
I vos allus in a dust-yard. I don’t think I could do no how in no other
place. You see I vouldn’t be ’appy like; I only knows how to vork at
the dust ’cause I’m used to it, and so vos father afore me, and I’ll
stick to it as long as I can. I yarns about half-a-bull [2_s._ 6_d._] a
day, take one day with another. Sall sometimes yarns as much, and ven I
goes out at night I yarns a bob or two more, and so I gits along pretty
tidy; sometimes yarnin more and sometimes yarnin less. I niver vos sick
as I knows on; I’ve been queerish of a morning a good many times, but
I doesn’t call that sickness; it’s only the lush and nothink more. The
smells nothink at all, ven you gits used to it. Lor’ bless you! you’d
think nothink on it in a veek’s time,--no, no more nor I do. There’s
tventy on us vorks here--riglar. I don’t think there’s von on ’em ’cept
Scratchey Jack can read, but he can do it stunning; he’s out vith the
cart now, but he’s the chap as can patter to you as long as he likes.”

Concerning the capital and income of the London dust business, the
following estimate may be given as to the amount of property invested
in and accruing to the trade.

It has been computed that there are 90 contractors, large and small;
of these upwards of two-thirds, or about 35, may be said to be in a
considerable way of business, possessing many carts and horses, as well
as employing a large body of people; some yards have as many as 150
hands connected with them. The remaining 55 masters are composed of
“small men,” some of whom are known as “running dustmen,” that is to
say, persons who collect the dust without any sanction from the parish;
but the number belonging to this class has considerably diminished
since the great deterioration in the price of “brieze.” Assuming, then,
that the great and little master dustmen employ on an average between
six and seven carts each, we have the following statement as to the


CAPITAL OF THE LONDON DUST TRADE.

   600 Carts, at 20_l._ each               £12,000
   600 Horses, at 25_l._ each               15,000
   600 Sets of harness, at 2_l._ per set     1,200
   600 Ladders, at 5_s._ each                  150
  1200 Baskets, at 2_s._ each                  120
  1200 Shovels, at 2_s._ each                  120
                                           -------
       Being a total capital of            £28,590
                                           -------

If, therefore, we assert that the capital of this trade is between
25,000_l._ and 30,000_l._ in value, we shall not be far wrong either
way.

Of the annual income of the same trade, it is almost impossible to
arrive at any positive results; but, in the absence of all authentic
information on the subject, we may make the subjoined conjecture.


INCOME OF THE LONDON DUST TRADE.

  Sum paid to contractors for the removal
  of dust from the 176 metropolitan
  parishes, at 200_l._ each parish          £35,200

  Sum obtained for 900,000 loads of
  dust, at 2_s._ 6_d._ per load             112,500
                                           --------
                                           £147,700
                                           --------

Thus it would appear that the total income of the dust trade may be
taken at between 145,000_l._ and 150,000_l._ per annum.

Against this we have to set the yearly out-goings of the business,
which may be roughly estimated as follows:--


EXPENDITURE OF THE LONDON DUST TRADE.

  Wages of 1800 labourers, at 10_s._ a
  week each (including sifters and carriers)         £46,800
  Keep of 600 horses, at 10_s._ a week each           15,600
  Wear and tear of stock in trade                       4000
  Rent for 90 yards, at 100_l._ a year each
  (large and small)                                     9000
                                                     -------
                                                     £75,400
                                                     -------

The above estimates give us the following aggregate results:--

  Total yearly incomings of the London dust trade   £147,700
  Total yearly out-goings                             75,400
                                                    --------
  Total yearly profit                                £72,300
                                                    --------

Hence it would appear that the profits of the dust-contractors are very
nearly at the rate of 100_l._ per cent. on their expenditure. I do
not think I have over estimated the incomings, or under estimated the
out-goings; at least I have striven to avoid doing so, in order that no
injustice might be done to the members of the trade.

This aggregate profit, when divided among the 90 contractors, will make
the clear gains of each master dustman amount to about 800_l._ per
annum: of course some derive considerably more than this amount, and
some considerably less.


OF THE LONDON SEWERAGE AND SCAVENGERY.

The subject I have now to treat--principally as regards street-labour,
but generally in its sanitary, social, and economical bearings--may
really be termed vast. It is of the cleansing of a capital city, with
its thousands of miles of streets and roads _on_ the surface, and its
thousands of miles of sewers and drains _under_ the surface of the
earth. And first let me deal with the subject in a historical point of
view.

Public scavengery or street-cleansing, from the earliest periods of
our history, since municipal authority regulated the internal economy
of our cities, has been an object of some attention. In the records of
all our civic corporations may be found bye-laws, or some equivalent
measure, to enforce the cleansing of the streets. But these regulations
were little enforced. It was ordered that the streets should be swept,
but often enough men were not employed by the authorities to sweep
them; until after the great fire of London, and in many parts for years
after that, the tradesman’s apprentice swept the dirt from the front
of his master’s house, and left it in the street, to be removed at the
leisure of the scavenger. This was in the streets most famous for the
wealth and commercial energy of the inhabitants. The streets inhabited
by the poor, until about the beginning of the present century, were
rarely swept at all. The unevenness of the pavement, the accumulation
of wet and mud in rainy weather, the want of foot-paths, and sometimes
even of grates and kennels, made Cowper, in one of his letters,
describe a perambulation of some of these streets as “going by water.”

Even this state of things was, however, an improvement. In the accounts
of the London street-broils and fights, from the reign of Henry III.,
more especially during the war of the Roses, down to the civil war
which terminated in the beheading of Charles I., mention is more or
less made of the combatants having availed themselves of the shelter
of the rubbish in the streets. These mounds of rubbish were then kinds
of street-barricades, opposing the progress of passengers, like the
piles of overturned omnibuses and other vehicles of the modern French
street-combatants. There is no doubt that in the older times these
mounds were composed, first, of the earth dug out for the foundation of
some building, or the sinking of some well, or (later on) the formation
of some drain; for these works were often long in hand, not only from
the interruptions of civil strife and from want of funds, but from
indifference, owing to the long delay in their completion, and were
often altogether abandoned. After dusk the streets of the capital of
England could not be traversed without lanterns or torches. This was
the case until the last 40 or 50 years in nearly all the smaller towns
of England, but there the darkness was the principal obstacle; in the
inferior parts of “Old London,” however, there were the additional
inconveniences of broken limbs and robbery.

It would be easy to adduce instances from the olden writers in proof of
all the above statements, but it seems idle to cite proofs of what is
known to all.

The care of the streets, however, as regards the removal of the dirt,
or, as the weather might be, the dust and mud, seems never to have
been much of a national consideration. It was left to the corporations
and the parishes. Each of these had its own especial arrangements
for the collection and removal of dirt in its own streets; and as
each parochial or municipal system generally differed in some respect
or other, taken as a whole, there was no one general mode or system
adopted. To all this the street-management of our own days, in the
respect of scavengery, and, as I shall show, of sewerage, presents
a decided improvement. This improvement in street-management is not
attributable to any public agitation--to any public, and, far less,
national manifestation of feeling. It was debated sometimes in courts
of Common Council, in ward and parochial meetings, but the public
generally seem to have taken no express interest in the matter. The
improvement seems to have established itself gradually from the
improved tastes and habits of the people.

Although _generally_ left to the local powers, the subject of
street-cleansing and management, however, has not been _entirely_
overlooked by Parliament. Among parliamentary enactments is the
measure best known as “Michael Angelo Taylor’s Act,” passed early in
the present century, which requires all householders every morning
to remove from the front of their premises any snow which may have
fallen during the night, &c., &c.; the late Police Acts also embrace
subordinately the subject of street-management.

On the other hand the sewers have long been the object of national
care. “The daily great damages and losses which have happened in many
and divers parts of this realm” (I give the spirit of the preamble of
several Acts of Parliament), “as well by the reason of the outrageous
flowings, surges, and course of the river in and upon the marsh
grounds and other low places, heretofore through public wisdom won
and made profitable for the great commonwealth of this realm, as also
by occasion of land waters and other outrageous springs in and upon
meadows, pastures, and other low grounds adjoining to rivers, floods,
and other water-courses,” caused parliamentary attention to be given to
the subject.

Until towards the latter part of the last century, however, the streets
even of the better order were often flooded during heavy and continuous
rains, owing to the sewers and drains having been choked, so that the
sewage forced its way through the gratings into the streets and yards,
flooding all the underground apartments and often the ground floors of
the houses, as well as the public thoroughfares with filth.

It is not many months since the neighbourhood of so modern a locality
as Waterloo-bridge was flooded in this manner, and boats were used
in the Belvidere and York-roads. On the 1st of August, 1846, after a
tremendous storm of thunder, hail, and rain, miles of the capital were
literally under water; hundreds of publicans’ beer-cellars contained
far more water than beer, and the damage done was enormous. These facts
show that though much has been accomplished towards the efficient
sewerage of the metropolis, much remains to be accomplished still.

The first statute on the subject of the public sewerage was as early
as the 9th year of the reign of Henry III. There were enactments,
also, in most of the succeeding reigns, but they were all partial and
conflicting, and related more to local desiderata than to any system
of sewerage for the public benefit, until the reign of Henry VIII.,
when the “Bill of Sewers” was passed (in 1531). This act provided for a
more general system of sewerage in the cities and towns of the kingdom,
requiring the main channels to be of certain depths and dimensions,
according to the localities, situation, &c. In many parts of the
country the sewerage is still carried on according to the provisions in
the act of Henry VIII., but those provisions were modified, altered, or
“explained,” by many subsequent statutes.

Any uniformity which might have arisen from the observance of the
same principles of sewerage was effectually checked by the measures
adopted in London, more especially during the last 100 years. As
the metropolis increased new sewerage became necessary, and new
local bodies were formed for its management. These were known as
the Commissions of Sewers, and the members of those bodies acted
independently one of another, under the authority of their own Acts of
Parliament, each having its own board, engineers, clerks, officers,
and workmen. Each commission was confined to its own district, and
did what was accounted best for its own district with little regard
to any general plan of sewerage, so that London was, and in a great
measure is, sewered upon different principles, as to the size of the
sewers and drains, the rates of inclination, &c. &c. In 1847 there
were eight of these districts and bodies: the City of London, the
Tower Hamlets, Saint Katherine’s, Poplar and Blackwall, Holborn and
Finsbury, Westminster and part of Middlesex, Surrey and Kent, and
Greenwich. In 1848 these several bodies were concentrated by act of
parliament, and entitled the “Metropolitan Commission of Sewers;” but
the City of London, as appears to be the case with every parliamentary
measure affecting the metropolis, presents an exception, as it retains
a separate jurisdiction, and is not under the control of the general
commissioners, to whom parliament has given authority over such matters.

The management of the metropolitan scavengery and sewerage, therefore,
differs in this respect. The scavengery is committed to the care of
the several parishes, each making its own contract; the sewerage is
consigned by Parliament to a body of commissioners. In both instances,
however, the expenses are paid out of local rates.

I shall now proceed to treat of each of these subjects separately,
beginning with the cleansing of the streets.
